<title>Contract Appendix A Work Statement (Maintenance) FY 2003-2006</title>
REGION: EMSI - 04    PROPOSED ME 03030 WORK STATEMENT STATE FISCAL YEAR 2003-2006 
APPENDIX A  (MAINTENANCE) 
For each Regional EMS System Component/Goal, list the objectives to be accomplished during each contract period to achieve the particular goal.  For each objective, indicate tasks to be performed to accomplish the objective. 
FY 2003-2004  FY 2004-2005  FY 2005-2006  
EMS SYSTEM  REGIONAL  REGIONAL  REGIONAL  
COMPONENT/GOAL  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  
I. LEGISLATION  
A. Legislation and    Regulation  1.  Promote and support legislative efforts to improve the EMS system.  Regularly inform EMSI Board, MDC and others of significant legislative regulatory activity.  1.  Promote and support legislative efforts to improve the EMS system.  Regularly inform EMSI Board, MDC and others of significant legislative regulatory activity.  1.  Promote and support legislative efforts to improve the EMS system.  Regularly inform EMSI Board, MDC and others of significant legislative regulatory activity.  
Work with PEHSC and  Work with PEHSC and  Work with PEHSC and  
other legislative entities to regularly obtain updated information on proposed health care and related legislation.  other legislative entities to regularly obtain updated information on proposed health care and related legislation.  other legislative entities to regularly obtain updated information on proposed health care and related legislation.  
Work with the Multi- Work with the Multi- Work with the Multi- 
Regional Committee and EMSI Board in education  Regional Committee and EMSI Board in education  Regional Committee and EMSI Board in education  
of Legislators.  of Legislators.  of Legislators.  
2. Conduct operations in compliance with EMS Act and regulation  EMSI will conduct its operations in accordance with the EMS Act, and applicable regulations.  2. Conduct operations in compliance with EMS Act and regulation.  EMSI will conduct its operations in accordance with the EMS Act, and applicable regulations  2.Conduct operations in compliance with  EMS Act and regulations.  EMSI will conduct its operations in accordance with the EMS Act, and applicable regulations  
3. Support implementation training and public education efforts regarding out-of-hospital “Do Not Resuscitate” statute & regulations   Publish statute and regulations in Intercom. Support public education with regard to this important legislation. .  3. Support implementation training and public education efforts regarding out-of-hospital “Do Not Resuscitate” statute & regulations.  Publish F.A.Q. in print media.  3. Support implementation training and public education efforts regarding out-of-hospital “Do Not Resuscitate” statute & regulations  Publish F.A.Q. in print media.  

II. MEDICAL DIRECTION A. Receiving and Special Care Facilities  1.  Ensure all patients needing emergency medical care can access an appropriate receiving facility. 2. Integrate special care facilities into the EMS system. 3. Comply with hospital diversion reports monthly.  .  Listing of regional receiving facilities is maintained at the regional office and updated as needed/necessary. This information is promulgated to all services in the region when applicable. Add facilities for all of Region 13. Add information on E.O.C. & WMD capabilities and means. As special care facilities become recognized by the Department of Health EMS Office they will be integrated into the EMS system. Continue to work with the Department  for special care recognition, other than trauma centers. File monthly diversion reports with EMSO by 10th working day of each  month.  1.  Ensure all patients needing emergency medical care can access an appropriate receiving facility. 2. Integrate special care facilities into the EMS system. 3.Comply with hospital diversion reports monthly.  Listing of regional receiving facilities is maintained at the regional office and updated as needed/necessary. This information is promulgated to all services in the region when applicable. Add facilities for all of Region 13. Add information on E.O.C & WMD capabilities and means. As special care facilities become recognized by the Department of Health EMS Office they will be integrated into the EMS system. Continue to work with the Department for special care recognition, other than trauma centers. File monthly diversion reports with EMSO by 10th working day of each month.  1.  Ensure all patients needing emergency medical care can access an appropriate receiving facility. 2. Integrate special care facilities into the EMS system. 3.Comply with hospital diversion reports monthly.  Listing of regional receiving facilities is maintained at the regional office and updated as needed/necessary. This information is promulgated to all services in the region when applicable. Add facilities for all of Region 13. Add information on  E.O.C & WMD capabilitiets and means. As special care facilities become recognized by the Department of Health EMS Office they will be integrated into the EMS system Continue to work with to the Department  for special care recognition, other than trauma centers. File monthly diversion reports with EMSO by 10th working day of each month.  

B.  Medical Command Facilities C. Medical Direction  1.  Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical command facilities. 2. Ensure all individual command facilities comply with statutory & regulatory requirements 1.Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical direction.  Through our quarterly newsletter, medical command facilities are identified and recognized as medical command facilities. Continue to advocate and pursue strong bonds between both ALS & BLS service medical directors, medical command facilities and EMS personnel. Promote an open-door policy for EMS personnel to receive information about medical command facilities in the region, via internet and complaint investigation Continue to ensure all ALS services and all BLS services with AED capabilities have a medical director and have access to medical direction, guidance, advice and oversight. Work with all services to develop relationships with physicians  1.  Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical command facilities 1.Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical direction.  Through our quarterly newsletter, medical command facilities are identified and recognized as medical command facilities Continue to advocate and pursue strong bonds between both ALS & BLS service medical directors, medical command facilities and EMS personnel. Promote an open-door policy for EMS personnel to receive information about medical command facilities in the region, via internet and complaint investigation Continue to ensure all ALS services and all BLS services with AED capabilities have a medical director and have access to medical direction, guidance, advice and oversight Work with all services to develop relationships with physicians  Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical command facilities 1.Ensure all prehospital providers have access to medical direction.  Through our quarterly newsletter, medical command facilities are identified and recognized as medical command facilities Continue to advocate and pursue strong bonds between both ALS & BLS service medical directors, medical command facilities and EMS personnel. Promote an open-door policy for EMS personnel to receive information about medical command facilities in the region, via internet and complaint investigation Continue to ensure all ALS services and all BLS services with AED capabilities have a medical director and have access to medical direction, guidance, advice and oversight Work with all services to develop relationships with physicians  

III,  SYSTEM OPERATIONS A. Communications  2.  Develop emergency care in relation to community needs.* 3. Implement statewide BLS protocols and use ALS guidelines to update regional protocols 1. Facilitate the availability of communication systems to EMS providers.  Provide technical guidance to prehospital personnel and medical directors on medical policy issues Implement the Medical Treatment and Transport Protocols. Continue to have the regional medical directors meet on a quarterly basis and ensure timely completion of Medical Command Applications.. Continue to develop relationships with Community Health Improvement Projects and determine what additional emergency care (medications, equipment, training) is needed. Publish & distribute as approved Monitor communication industry changes and equipment advances and provide funding to  2.  Develop emergency care in relation to community needs.* 3. Update regional EMS treatment & transport protocols annually 1. Facilitate the availability of communication systems to EMS providers.  Provide technical guidance to prehospital personnel and medical directors on medical policy issues Revise & update Medical Treatment and Transport Protocols. Continue to have the regional medical directors meet on a quarterly basis and ensure timely completion of Medical Command Applications Continue to develop relationships with Community Health Improvement Projects and determine what additional emergency care (medications, equipment, training) is needed. Publish & distribute  Monitor communication industry changes and equipment advances and provide funding to  2.  Develop emergency care in relation to community needs.* 3. Update regional EMS treatment & transport protocols annually 1. Facilitate the availability of communication systems to EMS providers.  Provide technical guidance to prehospital personnel and medical directors on medical policy issues Revise & update Medical Treatment and Transport Protocols. Continue to have the regional medical directors meet on a quarterly basis and .ensure timely completion of Medical Command Applications Continue to develop relationships with Community Health Improvement Projects and determine what additional emergency care (medications, equipment, training) is needed. Publish & distribute Monitor communication industry changes and equipment advances and provide funding to  

B. Licensure/Recognition  2,Develop regional communication plan based on assessment of need & long term goals. 3. Collaborate with RCTTFs, hospitals, PSAPs, EMAs and EMSO in building communications among these 2 entities to assure redundancy & interoperability. 1. Ensure that all prehospital providers are licensed or recognized under state requirments.  upgrade current systems equipment as funds are available. Develop list of resources & frequencies of Ambulance & County Dispatch. Develop Communication Study to measure interoperability within and between counties, and identify needed redundancy. Send quarterly notices to ambulance services as their license nears expiration, with initial notices mailed one year prior to the expiration date, followed by quarterly notices Continue to implement licensure, certification, and recognition programs. Distribute ambulance licensure applications provided by the state to any newly established BLS, ALS or  Air ambulance services, and support implementation of the electronic licensure application and process.  2.Develop regional communication plan based on assessment of need & long term goals. 3. Collaborate with RCTTFs, hospitals, PSAPs, EMAs and EMSO in building communications among these 2 entities to assure redundancy & interoperability. 1. Ensure that all prehospital providers are licensed or recognized under state requirments.  upgrade current systems equipment as funds are available. Encourage services through allocation of EMSOF funds and other actions to grow their communication systems in accordance with the Regional Plan. Implement Communication Study, incorporating findings and priorities. Send quarterly notices to ambulance services as their license nears expiration, with initial notices mailed one year prior to the expiration date, followed by quarterly notices. Continue to implement licensure, certification, and recognition programs. Distribute ambulance licensure applications provided by the state to any newly established BLS, ALS or  Air ambulance services, and support implementation of the electronic licensure application and process.  2.Develop regional communication plan based on assessment of need & long term goals. 3, Collaborate with RCTTFs, hospitals, PSAPs, EMAs and EMSO in building communications among these 2 entities to assure redundancy & interoperability. 1. Ensure that all prehospital providers are licensed or recognized under state requirments.  upgrade current systems equipment as funds are available. Encourage services through allocation of EMSOF funds and other actions to grow their communication systems in accordance with the Regional Plan. . Implement Communication Study. incorporating findings and priorities. Send quarterly notices to ambulance services as their license nears expiration, with initial notices mailed one year prior to the expiration date, followed by quarterly notices. Continue to implement licensure, certification, and recognition programs. Distribute ambulance licensure applications provided by the state to any newly established BLS, ALS or  Air ambulance services, and support implementation of the electronic licensure application and process.  

2.  Conduct inspections and other reviews in accordance with EMS statute & regulations. 3. Implement rescue programs in collaboration with fire ser ices and in compliance with policies from EMSO. 4. Monitor ambulance services to identify problems early. 5. Conduct problem assessment and plan of corrections.. Develop meetings with services not meeting requirements and include the stakeholders in meetings. 6. Facilitate the availability of licensed recognized EMS resource to provide emergency care  Coordinate, schedule and conduct licensure on-site inspections of 29 ambulance services to be relicensed in accordance with the policy/procedure as per Act 45    and the Rules and Regulations. Continue to process licensure applications and perform inspections of new and current EMS providers in the region and monitor services for responses and staffing patterns.  Monitor geographic areas where EMS has a 10 minute or greater response time. Encourage QRS in those areas where a QRS may be needed.  2.Conduct inspections and other reviews in accordance with EMS statute & regulations. 3. Facilitate the availability of prehospital care for the residents of the region 4.Facilitate the availability of licensed/recognized EMS resources to provide emergency care.  Coordinate, schedule and conduct licensure on-site inspections of 54 ambulance services to be relicensed in accordance with the policy/procedure as per Act 45    and the Rules and Regulations. Continue to process licensure applications and perform inspections of new and current EMS providers in the region and monitor services for responses and staffing patterns. Monitor geographic areas where EMS has a 10 minute or greater response time. Encourage QRS in those areas where a QRS may be needed.  2. Conduct inspections and other reviews in accordance with EMS statue & regulations. 3.Facilitate the availability of prehospital emergency care for the residents of the region 4.Facilitate the availability of licensed/recognized EMS resources to provide emergency care. .  Coordinate, schedule and conduct licensure on-site inspections of 95 ambulance services to be relicensed in accordance with the policy/procedure as per Act 45    and the Rules and Regulations. Continue to process licensure applications and perform inspections of new and current EMS providers in the region and monitor services for responses and staffing patterns. Monitor geographic areas where EMS has a 10 minute or greater response time. Encourage QRS in those areas where a QRS may be needed.  

C. Human Resources/CISD  7. Facilitate the availability of prehospital emergency care for rhe residents of the region. 1.  Promote recruitment and retention programs for EMS providers.*  Region continues to promote emergency care thru QRS, ambulance, training, hospital accred. and licencing In accordance with EMSOF funding priioritieis and the Regional EMS Development Plan, EMSI shall continue to administer the provider grants for both services and equipment Continue to assure emergency care to visitors and residents in a timely manner. Maintain listing of CISD teams in region. Encourage use of CISD by providers in conjunction with traumatic events. Disseminate information on training programs and recrutiment and retention and CISD including those provided at EMS Update  Collaborate with training institutes and others toward the assessment of existing workforce resources and ascertaining needs. Continue this collaboration to  7. Facilitate the availability of prehospital emergency care for the region. 1.  Promote recruitment and retention programs for EMS providers.*  Region continues to promote emergency care thru QRS ambulance, training, hospital accred. and licencing In accordance with EMSOF funding priioritieis and the Regional EMS Development Plan, EMSI shall continue to administer the provider grants for both services and equipment Continue to assure emergency care to visitors and residents in a timely manner. Maintain listing of CISD teams in region. Encourage use of CISD by providers in conjunction with traumatic events. Disseminate information on training programs and recrutiment and retention and CISD including those provided at EMS Update Collaborate with training institutes and others toward the assessment of existing workforce resources and ascertaining needs. Continue this collaboration to  7.Facilitate the availability of prehospital emergency care for the region. 1.  Promote recruitment and retention programs for EMS providers.*  Region continues to promote emergency care thru QRS, ambulance, training, hospital accred. And licencing In accordance with EMSOF funding priioritieis and the Regional EMS Development Plan, EMSI shall continue to administer the provider grants for both services and equipment Continue to assure emergency care to visitors and residents in a timely manner. Maintain listing of CISD teams in region. Encourage use of CISD by providers in conjunction with traumatic events. Disseminate information on training programs and recrutiment and retention and CISD including those provided at EMS Update Collaborate with training institutes and others toward the assessment of existing workforce resources and ascertaining needs. Continue this collaboration to  

D. Public Access  2.Conduct testing in accordance with the EMS Office policies & procedures. 3. Manage testing tools in compliance with security policies. 4. Assure adequate supply & access to testing so that EMS personnel can meet requirements. 5. Conduct accreditation assessment process for training institutes in accordance with EMS statutes & regulations. 6. Conduct problem assessment and plan of correction meetings with training institutes. 1.  Ensure public awareness of the availability and utilization of the emergency communication system.. 2. Assure regular two way communication with PSAP for up to date emergency medical dispatch information, training & process.  positively impact recruitment and retention. . The region will conduct its testing in accordance with policies and procedures specified by DOH, EMS Office. Conduct or participate in appropriate public awareness programs explaining how to access and use the EMS system correctly. Survey communications needs for each county, without duplicating work by Emergency Management Agencies, Pennsylvania Emergency  2. Conduct testing in accordance with the EMS Office policies & procedures. 3. Manage testing tools in compliance with security policies. 4. Assure adequate supply & access to testing so that EMS personnel can met requirements  5. Conduct accreditation assessment process for training institutes in accordance with EMS statutes & regulations. 6. Conduct problem assessment and plan of correction meetings with training institutes. 1.  Ensure public awareness of the availability and utilization of the emergency communication system. 2. Assure regular two way communication with PSAP for up to date emergency medical dispatch information, training & process.  positively impact recruitment and retention. The region will conduct its testing in accordance with policies and procedures specified by DOH, EMS Office. Conduct or participate in appropriate public awareness programs explaining how to access and use the EMS system correctly Plan on inclusion of communication priorities in EMSOF distribution.  2. Conduct testing in accordance with the EMS Office policies & procedures. 3. Manage testing tools in compliance with security policies. 4. Assure adequate supply & access to testing so that EMS personnel can meet requirements. 5. Conduct accreditation assessment process for training institutes in accordance with EMS statutes & regulations. 6. Conduct problem assessment and plan of correction meetings with training institutes. 1.  Ensure public awareness of the availability and utilization of the emergency communication system. 2. Assure regular two way communication with PSAP for up to date emergency medical dispatch information, training & process.  positively impact recruitment and retention. The region will conduct its testing in accordance with policies and procedures specified by DOH, EMS Office. Conduct or participate in appropriate public awareness programs explaining how to access and use the EMS system correctly Plan on inclusion of communication priorities in EMSOF distribution.  

E.  Evaluation F.  Disaster Response  1.  Evaluate regional Emergency Medical Services system. 2. Conduct spot inspections for ambulance services, training institutes, con-ed sponsors & medical command facilities 1. Facilitate the availability of resources/training necessary to respond to a disaster.*  Management, Region 13 or the statewide Radio Communications Project. Develop a tool to use existing data resources to evaluate system performances. .Continue to use data generated by various means to make evaluation judgements about strengths and weaknesses of the regional EMS system and address these. The region will conduct inspections of these facilities including spot (unannounced) inspections. Provide technical assistance during actual disaster situations. Work with training institutes and con-ed sponsers to promote MCI and disaster training. EMSI Update educational track for the training of personnel in MCI disaster  1.  Evaluate regional Emergency Medical Services system. 2. Conduct spot inspections for ambulance services, training institutes, con-ed sponsors & medical command facilities 1. Facilitate the availability of resources/training necessary to respond to a disaster.*  Apply the tool and report results to the region Continue to use data generated by various means to make evaluation judgements about strengths and weaknesses of the regional EMS system and address these. The region will conduct inspections of these facilities including spot (unannounced) inspections. Provide technical assistance during actual disaster situations. Work with training institutes and con-ed sponsers to promote MCI and disaster training. EMSI Update educational track for the training of personnel in MCI disaster training. Work with committees to help develop regional and  1.  Evaluate regional Emergency Medical Services system. 2.Conduct spot inspections for ambulance services, training institutes, con-ed sponsors & medical  command facilities 1. Facilitate the availability of resources/training necessary to respond to a disaster.*  Reapply the tool  to ascertain improvement Continue to use data generated by various means to make evaluation judgements about strengths and weaknesses of the regional EMS system and address these. The region will conduct inspections of these facilities including spot (unannounced) inspections. Provide technical assistance during actual disaster situations. Work with training institutes and con-ed sponsers to promote MCI and disaster training. EMSI Update educational track for the training of personnel in MCI disaster training. Work with committees to help develop regional and  

IV. MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS  Patient Record/Data Collection  2. Develop an up to date regional EMS catastrophic casualty care plan. 3. Assure EMS regional representation and participation in RCTTF for planning, advocacy and material support. 4. Represent the DOH EMS Office at forward Emergency Ops Center and on site as requested.. 5.  Conduct EMS Regional after action, review & report. 1. Participate in the statewide standardized patient data collection system. 2. Review the current data collection system to ensure that it is consistent  training. Work with committees to help develop regional and local plans and resources for disasters. The region will continues to support the catastrophic casualty plan of Region 13, on RCTTF. Develop the plan. Leadership will participate in the metings. When requested, the region will represent the DOH EMS Office and assist at the Emergency Operations Center or onsite. Interview participants write and distribute the report as needed. EMSI will provide trip sheets to EMS providers in the region. EMSI will provide DOH with data collected from ambulance services and other participating  2. Assure an up to date regional EMS catastrophic casualty care plan. 3, Assure EMS regional representation and participation in RCTTF for planning, advocacy and material support. 4. Represent the DOH EMS Office at forward Emergency Ops Center and on site as requested. 5.  Conduct EMS Regional after action, review & report. 1. Participate in the statewide standardized patient data collection system.  local plans and resources for disasters. The region will continues to support the catastrophic casualty plan of Region 13, on RCTTF. Review the plan Leadership will participate in the metings When requested, the region will represent the DOH EMS Office and assist at the Emergency Operations Center or onsite. Interview participants write and distribute the report as needed. EMSI will provide trip sheets to EMS providers in the region. EMSI will provide DOH with data collected from ambulance services and other participating agencies in the region. The format will conform and link with the data base used by DOH.  2. Assure an up to date regional EMS catastrophic casualty care plan. 3. Assure EMS regional representation and participation in RCTTF for planning, advocacy and material support. 4. Represent the DOH EMS Office at forward Emergency Ops Center and on site as requested. 5. Conduct EMS office after review & report.. 5.  Conduct EMS Regional after action, review & report. 1. Participate in the statewide standardized patient data collection system.  local plans and resources For disasters. The region will continue to support the catastrophic casualty plan of Region 13, on RCTTF. Assess compliance with the plan. Leadership will participate in the metings When requested, the region will represent the DOH EMS Office and assist at the Emergency Operations Center or onsite. Interview participants write and distribute the report as needed. EMSI will provide trip sheets to EMS providers in the region. EMSI will provide DOH with data collected from ambulance services and other participating agencies in the region. The format will conform and link with the data base used by DOH.  

V. TRAINING AND EDUCATION A. Public Information and Education and Relations  with the state data collection processes. 3. Facilitate real time transfer of information from prehospital team to receiving facility team. 4.Submit reports in accordance with regulations & policy. 5. Conduct regional assessment using PCRs. 6. Increase percentage of PCR’s submitted by electronic means by 100,000 PCR’s 1.  Promote and develop programs and information that improves public awareness, understanding, and participation in the EMS system.*  agencies in the region  The format will conform and link with the data base used by DOH All data collected by EMSI, eg, trip sheets to and electronic, will be consistent with the DOH data collection process and policy Educate services about need for complete, accurate and timely patient care reports. Generate and submit applicable reports Generate reports for  Medical Direction Committee and follow up for subsequent questions and decisions on care. Offer services funding for computer purchase by re-allocating funds within the existing budget. Disseminate news releases/public service announcements to the media. Provide EMS public awareness materials and assistance to those requesting it. Publish the EMSI Intercom on a quarterly basis.  2. Review the current data collection sytem to ensure that it is consistent with the state data collection processes. 3. Facilitate real time transfer of information from prehospital  team to receiving facility team. 4. Submit reports in accordance with regulations & policy. 5. Conduct regional assessment using PCRs. 6. Increase percentage of PCR’s submitted by electronic means by 110,000 PCR’s. 1.  Promote and develop programs and information that improves public awareness, understanding, and participation in the EMS system.*  All data collected by EMSI, eg, trip sheets to and electronic, will be consistent with the DOH data collection process, and policy Educate services about need for complete, accurate and timely patient care reports. Generate and submit applicable reports Generate reports for  Medical Direction Committee and follow up for subsequent questions and decisions on care. Offer services funding for computer purchase by re-allocating funds and savings on PCRs within the existing budget. Disseminate news releases/public service announcements to the media. Provide EMS public awareness materials and assistance to those requesting it. Publish the EMSI Intercom on a quarterly basis.  2. Review the current data collection sytem to ensure that it is consistent with the state data collection processes. 3. Facilitate real time transfer of information from prehospital  team to receiving facility team. 4. Submit reports in accordance with regulations & policies. 5.Conduct regional assessment using PCR’s. 6. Increase percentage of PCR’s submitted by electronic means by 45,000 PCR’s. 1.  Promote and develop programs and information that improves public awareness, understanding, and participation in the EMS system.*  All data collected by EMSI, eg, trip sheets to and electronic, will be consistent with the DOH data collection process, and policy Educate services about need for complete, accurate and timely patient care reports. Generate and submit applicable reports Generate reports for  Medical Direction Committee and follow up for subsequent questions and decisions on care. Offer services funding for computer purchase by re-allocating funds and savings n PCRs within the existing budget. Disseminate news releases/public service announcements to the media. Provide EMS public awareness materials and assistance to those requesting it. Publish the EMSI Intercom on a quarterly basis.  

B. Regional Training Programs  2. Conduct regional EMS Week Campaigns. 1. Assure the availability of EMS and rescue training, refresher training and continuing education programs for EMS providers. 2. Identify training needs, especially those related to terrorism threats and work with RCTTFs, EMAs, EMSO to meet them.  Participate in programs and events that promote public awareness of EMS Send out packets and other information to support the Region’s Recruitment and Retention efforts. Continue to contract with training institutes for EMS and rescue classes and have the programs advertised via the EMS community. EMSI shall enter into subcontracts with approved organizations for the reimbursement of training personnel and training equipment, assessing financial support already available from the Department of education, The State Fire Academy, and other supporting organizations. Depending on need, priority given to direct scholarships for paramedics and/or EMT students EMSI will publish on their web site a lisrting of approved sponsors and registered con-ed classes. Survey services with respect to WMD training needs, and consider using CDC grant in support  2. Conduct regional EMS Week Campaigns. 1. Assure the availability of EMS and rescue training,  refresher training and continuing education programs for EMS providers. 2. Ensure the availability of con-ed sponsors and accredited training institutues.  Participate in programs and events that promote public awareness of EMS Send out packets and other information to support the Region’s Recruitment and Continue to contract with training institutes for EMS and rescue classes and have the programs advertised via the EMS community. EMSI shall enter into subcontracts with approved organizations for the reimbursement of training personnel and training equipment. EMSI will publish on their web site a lisrting of approved sponsors and registered con-ed classes. Allocate funding in accordance with this objective and the ones above.  2. Conduct regional EMS Week Campaigns. 1. Assure the availability of EMS and rescue training, refresher training and continuing education programs for EMS providers. 2. Ensure the availability of con-ed sponsors and accredited training institutues.  Participate in programs and events that promote public awareness of EMS Send out packets and other information to support the Region’s Recruitment and Continue to contract with training institutes for EMS and rescue classes and have the programs advertised via the EMS community. EMSI shall enter into subcontracts with approved organizations for the reimbursement of training personnel and training equipment. EMSI will publish on their web site a lisrting of approved sponsors and registered con-ed classes. Allocate funding in accordance with this objective and the ones above.  

C. Certification  3. Maintain regional database of personnel and con-ed & provide reports in accordance with regulations & policies. 4. Ensure the availability of con-ed sponsors and accredited training institutues. 1.  Implement /maintain the State EMS Certification process.  Maintain the Database EMSI will distribute as available, updated lists of sponsors and class sites throughout the counties and regions. Identify any areas where con ed is either absent or lacking and attempt to encourage additional classes and/or sponsors. EMSI will continue to notify accreditated training institutes and con-ed sponsors of their accreditation expiration date, review and process to DOH reaccreditation applications as they are received. EMSI will continue to process DOH and con-ed class registrations as received and send out class materials to the respective training sites. EMSI will generate and distribute individual coned status reports to ALS providers at least twice per year and BLS at least once each year. EMSI will process con 3. Maintain regional database of personnel and con-ed & provide reports in accordance with regulations & policies. 4. Ensure the availability of con-ed sponsors and accredited training institutes. 1.  Implement /maintain the State EMS Certification process.  Maintain the Database. EMSI will distribute as available, updated lists of sponsors and class sites throughout the counties and regions. Identify any areas where con ed is either absent or lacking and attempt to encourage additional classes and/or sponsors. EMSI will continue to notify accreditated training institutes and con-ed sponsors of their accreditation expiration date, review and process to DOH reaccreditation applications as they are received EMSI will continue to  process DOH and con-ed class registrations as received and send out class materials to the respective training sites. EMSI will generate and distribute individual coned status reports to ALS providers at least twice per year and BLS at least once each year. EMSI will process con 3. Maintain regional database of personnel and con-ed & provide reports in accordance with regulations & policies. 4. Ensure the availability of con-ed sponsors and accredited training institutes. 1.  Implement /maintain the State EMS Certification process.  Maintain the Database. EMSI will distribute as available, updated lists of sponsors and class sites throughout the counties and regions. Identify any areas where con ed is either absent or lacking and attempt to encourage additional classes and/or sponsors. EMSI will continue to notify accreditated training institutes and con-ed sponsors of their accreditation expiration date, review and process to DOH reaccreditation applications as they are received EMSI will continue to process DOH and con-ed class registrations as received and send out class materials to the respective training sites. EMSI will generate and distribute individual coned status reports to ALS providers at least twice per year and BLS at least once each year. EMSI will process con 

D. Prevention VI. CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT A. QA/System Evaluation  1. Identify EMS related injury and illnesess patterns and prevention techniques.* 2. Collaborate with Community Health Improvement Partnerships, PA ATS, Safe kids, Poison Control Centers and others to implement effective prevention efforts targeted at specific training needs. 1. Develop/update a regional continuous quality improvement plan.* 2. Integrate CQI into licensure, training, testing accreditation & customer service processes.  ed data and generate recertification materials quarterly and distribute recertification materials to EMS providers who successfully meet the recert requirements. EMSI shall send out quarterly, certification expiration notices six (6) months prior to the EMS providers expiration date. Survey the EMS services for this information and present programs thru con ed and conference to educate EMS personel on such prevention. Assist with implementation of C.E.R.T.s training and other education in response to community needs. Continue to collect PCR data into the computer system through mainly electronic data collection methods (using paper trip sheets as necessary).  CQI will be a primary focus of staff training during the year  1. Identify EMS related injury and illnesess patterns and prevention techniques.* 2. Collaborate with Community Health Improvement  Partnerships, PA ATS, Safe kids, Poison Control Centers and others to implement effective prevention efforts targeted at specific training needs. 1. Facilitate through direct technical assistance and continuing education programs CQI at the EMS provider level.* 2. Integrate CQI into licensure, training, testing accreditation & customer service processes.  ed data and generate recertification materials quarterly and distribute recertification materials to EMS providers who successfully meet the recert requirements. EMSI shall send out quarterly, certification expiration notices six (6) months prior to the EMS providers expiration date. Survey the EMS services for this information and present programs thru con ed and conference to educate EMS personel on such prevention. Assist with implementation of C.E.R.T.s training and other education in response to community needs. Provide technical assistance to prehospital personnel on quality improvement and management. CQI will be integrated into the processes used within the office  1. Identify EMS related injury and illnesess patterns and prevention techniques.* 2. Collaborate with Community Health Improvement Partnerships, PA ATS, Safe kids, Poison Control Centers and others to implement effective prevention efforts targeted at specific training needs. 1. Facilitate through direct technical assistance and continuing education programs CQI at the EMS provider level.* 2. Integrate CQI into licensure, training, testing accreditation & customer service processes.  ed data and generate recertification materials quarterly and distribute recertification materials to EMS providers who successfully meet the recert requirements. EMSI shall send out quarterly, certification expiration notices six (6) months prior to the EMS providers expiration date. Survey th EMS services for this information and present programs thru con ed and conference to educate EMS personel on such prevention. Assist with implementation of C.E.R.T.s training and other education in response to community needs. Provide technical assistance to prehospital personnel on quality improvement and management. CQI will be integrated into the processes used within the office.  

VII. ORGANIZATIONAL MANAGEMENT  3. Conduct investigations in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies, & procedures. 4.Manage complaint and disciplinary process in accordance with EMS Act, regs, policies & procedures. 1.  Provide an organizational structure to adminster and manage the regional EMS program under the guidelines of the PA Department of Health and the local governing body.  Investigations shall be conducted with strict attention paid to the applicable policies and procedures Complaint and disciplinary processes will be managed in accordance with applicable policies and procedures EMSI shall hold at least four meetings of the Executive Committee and the Board of Directors. EMSI shall hold meetings with county EMS coordinators and staff. EMSI shall provide for staff travel. EMSI shall assure staff is aware of developments in EMS through appropriate training plans. EMSI shall provide for business insurance, meeting arrangements, legal fees, equipment telephone, rent, postage, printing, office supplies, and related expenses. EMSI shall arrange for an annual independent audit. EMSI shall arrange for an  3. Conduct investigations in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies, & procedures. 4.Manage complaint and disciplinary process in accordance with EMS Act, regs, policies & procedures. 1.  Provide an organizational structure to administer and manage the regional EMS program under the guidelines of the PA Department of Health and the local governing body.  Investigations shall be conducted with strict attention paid to the applicable policies and procedures Complaint and disciplinary processes will be managed in accordance with applicable policies and procedures EMSI shall hold at least four meetings of the Executive Committee and the Board of Directors. EMSI shall hold meetings with county EMS coordinators and staff. EMSI shall provide for staff travel. EMSI shall assure staff is aware of developments in EMS through appropriate training plans. EMSI shall provide for business insurance, meeting arrangements, legal fees, equipment telephone, rent, postage, printing, office supplies, and related expenses. EMSI shall arrange for an annual independent audit. EMSI shall arrange for an annual meeting and  3. Conduct investigations in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies, & procedures. 4.Manage complaint and disciplinary process in accordance with EMS Act, regs, policies & procedures. 1.  Provide an organizational structure to administer and manage the regional EMS program under the guidelines of the PA Department of Health and the local governing body.  Investigations will be conducted with strict attention paid to the applicable policies and procedures. Complaint and disciplinary processes will be managed in accordance with applicable policies and procedures. EMSI shall hold at least four meetings of the Executive Committee and the Board of Directors. EMSI shall hold meetings with county EMS coordinators and staff. EMSI shall provide for staff travel. EMSI shall assure staff is aware of developments in EMS through appropriate training plans. ,’ EMSI shall provide for business insurance, meeting arrangements, legal fees, equipment telephone, rent, postage, printing, office supplies, and related expenses. EMSI shall arrange for an annual independent audit. EMSI shall arrange for an  

annual meeting and produce an annual report. EMSI shall participate on statewide EMS committees, e.g. MAC, Rescue, Communications, EMS/MIS EMT/Paramedic Advisory, Ambulance Licensure, PIER, Medical Advisory, Nursing Advisory, EMS Education, Legislative, EMSC and others. Staff shall attend meetings of related organizations and maintain frequent communications with other regions. 2. Implement process to assure that all staff are operating in compliance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedures. 3. Distribute EMSOF in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedure & published funding priorities. 4. Assure that all staff and Board Members function in accordance with regional EMS council’s conflict of interest policy. 5. Assure the EMS regional office is operational during  produce an annual report. EMSI shall participate on statewide EMS committees, e.g. MAC, Rescue, Communications, EMS/MIS EMT/Paramedic Advisory, Ambulance Licensure, PIER, Medical Advisory, Nursing Advisory, EMS Education, Legislative, EMSC and others. Staff shall attend meetings of related organizations and maintain frequent communications with other regions. 2. Implement process to assure that all staff are operating in compliance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedures. 3. Distribute EMSOF in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedure & published funding priorities. 4. Assure that all staff and Board Members function in accordance with regional EMS council’s conflict of interest policy. 5. Assure the EMS regional office is operational during normal working hours.  annual meeting and produce an annual report. EMSI shall participate on statewide EMS committees, e.g. MAC, Rescue, Communications, EMS/MIS EMT/Paramedic Advisory, Ambulance Licensure, PIER, Medical Advisory, Nursing Advisory, EMS Education, Legislative, EMSC and others. Staff shall attend meetings of related organizations and maintain frequent communications with other regions. 2. Implement process to assure that all staff are operating in compliance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedures. 3. Distribute EMSOF in accordance with EMS statutes, regs, policies & procedure & published funding priorities. 4. Assure that all staff and Board Members function in accordance with regional EMS council’s conflict of interest policy. 5. Assure the EMS regional office is operational during  

*REGIONAL OBJECTIVES MAY BE EITHER MAINTENANCE OR DEVELOPMENTAL  normal working hours. 6. Assure regional EMS council representation at all EMS office scheduled meetings for system operations and planning.  6. Assure regional EMS council representation at all EMS office scheduled meetings for system operations and planning.  normal working hours. 6. Assure regional EMS council representation at all EMS office scheduled meetings for system operations and planning.  


APPENDIX A (DEVELOPMENTAL) 
For each Regional EMS Systems Component/Goal indicate the tasks to be performed to accomplish the objectives associated with that particular goal.  Not all objectives will have a task and some objectives may have a task in only one or two years. 
FY 2000-2001  FY 2001-2002  FY 2002-2003  
EMS SYSTEM COMPONENT/GOAL  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  OBJECTIVE  TASKS  
XII.  PUBLIC EDUCATION  
To develop a public understanding of EMS through knowledge, skills and motivation, and to develop preventative measures aimed at reducing costly emergency medical care.  1. Conduct public education that is relevant and meaningful to the community.  As requested, EMSI will conduct EMS public education programs in the community.  EMSI members and  1. Conduct public education that is relevant and meaningful to the community.  As requested, EMSI will conduct EMS public education programs in the community.  EMSI members and  1. Conduct public education that is relevant and meaningful to the community.  As requested, EMSI will conduct EMS public education programs in the community.  EMSI members and  
staff shall travel to  staff shall travel to  staff shall travel to  
various counties in the  various counties in the  various counties in the  
region and shall sponsor meetings with county and municipal officials. Education will be provided regarding EMS law, rules and regulations, other legislation and court rulings that impact EMS, ambulance  region and shall sponsor meetings with county and municipal officials. Education will be provided regarding EMS law, rules and regulations, other legislation and court rulings that impact EMS, ambulance  region and shall sponsor meetings with county and municipal officials. Education will be provided regarding EMS law, rules  
licensure and other programs and information relevant to designating EMS services.  licensure and other programs and information relevant to designating EMS services  and regulations, other legislation and court rulings that impact EMS, ambulance  
licensure and other  
programs and information  
relevant to  
designating EMS  

1. To identify and develop a comprehensive systemwide program and evaluation process. .  services.to develop data linkage between EMSI and EMSO. Link EMSI’s data w/EMSO taking into account hardware and software needs and all appropriate protections for patient confidentiality and data security. $12,000 Engage in ongoing development of EMSI’s EDC system including hardware and software upgrades when needed, working to continuously develop and maintain state of the art data and system security and patient confidentiality protections. $15,000 Provide access and networked training e.g. through EMSI’s web page to instruct providers and assist them in utilizing their own data with aggregate regional data for QI purposes. State of the art data, security and patient confidentiality practices will be followed. $8,000  


