
DATE:	September 3, 2002 
SUBJECT:	Submission Process: EMS Research, Pilot Projects, or Expansion of Scope of Practice 
TO:  Regional EMS Directors  THRU: Director 
 EMS Office  
FROM:  Kathy Robinson  
EMS Planning and Clinical Systems Manager  

The attached four algorithms (flowcharts) are provided as a reference to outline the process for the submission of EMS research, pilot projects, or expansion of the EMS scope of practice to meet the policy requirements of 28 Pa. Code § 1001.61.  None of the algorithms are intended as a “stand alone” reference. Potential investigators should be instructed to refer to page 1 of 4 for initial guidance in determining the “pathway” for an idea. Page 1 applies to EVERY proposal. To determine if a study meets the criteria of “research” or “pilot project,” investigators will be required to provide clear scientific evidence (above that which is supplied by the manufacturer) that a device or clinical protocol is safe and effective for PREHOSPITAL use. A proposal must strongly document this evidence or it will not meet the criteria for a pilot project. If it does not meet the criteria for a pilot project, it must be submitted as a research project. An example of a research project might be the introduction of a new cardiac medication effective in cardiac catheterization labs to treat an arrhythmia but never studied in the prehospital setting. An example of an actual pilot project is the use of EpiPens®, a medication/product that is commonly used by laypersons with a history of anaphylaxis, as a primary medication for use by EMTs. 
Although MOST proposals will need to be evaluated through the pilot project or research process, occasionally a drug, device, or scope of practice procedure may be proposed to the EMS Office with such convincing evidence that the investigative requirements of these guidelines are unnecessary for implementation. Such proposals will still be subjected to the review process as outlined on the New Drug/Device/Technique algorithm on page 3.  Investigators are strongly encouraged to discuss such proposals with the EMS Office prior to submission for guidance on the proper pathway. The manager for EMS Planning and Clinical Systems is the point of contact for this purpose. 
Please note: Proposals submitted as pilot projects or proposals for a new drug, device, or technique that do not meet the standard for scientific verification as “safe” for out-of-hospital use will be returned to investigators. These projects can be resubmitted as a research proposal using the research proposal algorithm. 
RC 2002-034 -2-September 3, 2002 The following chart summarizes the requirements for proposal submission: 
PROPOSAL REQUIREMENTS  RESEARCH PROPOSAL  PILOT PROJECT  
Statement of hypothesis  YES  YES  
Description of methodology  YES  YES  
Estimated duration of the investigation  YES  YES  
Analysis of patient/volunteer/EMS risks/complications, side effects  YES  YES  
Assurance of patient confidentiality  YES  YES  
Informed consent procedures  YES  YES  
Plan for the notification of the EMS Office of unexpected adverse results  YES  YES  
Letter from the researcher who identifies him/herself as the lead investigator  YES  YES  
Letter from the physician who assumes clinical responsibility for the investigation  YES  YES  
Letters of support from EMS services involved  YES  YES  
Letters of support from service medical directors/medical command facilities, as appropriate  YES  YES  
Background including previous use in EMS  YES  YES  
IRB approval  YES  NO  
Training module for inservicing EMS personnel  NO  YES  

Submit proposals to Kathy Robinson, EMS Planning and Clinical Systems Manager, PA Department of Health, Division of Emergency Medical Services, PO Box 90, Harrisburg, PA  17108. 
Approved May 1, 2002 Page 1of 4


1 This idea can come from an individual, EMS service, EMS Region or related entity. 2 Early contact with Regional Council(s) and Department of Health EMS Office is suggested. 
Approved May 1, 2002 Page 2 of 4
 RESEARCH ALGORITHM 

3a Proposal must have responsible principal investigator, letter(s) of support from EMS Services involved, letter(s) of support from service medical directors/medical command facilities (if appropriate), background/introduction, statement of hypothesis, description of methodology, estimated duration of the investigation, analysis of patient/volunteer/EMS personnel risks/complications/side effects, assurance of patient confidentiality, informed consent procedures, plan for notification of EMS Office of unexpected adverse results, and plan for providing the Department with progress reports and final reports. 
4 Councils send recommendations to the PA Department of Health EMS Office within sixty days of receipt of the proposal. This is required before the EMS Office is permitted to give its approval. 
5 Approval from the investigator’s IRB or PA state IRB is required before Department of Health EMS Office approves. The investigator may obtain IRB approval before or after MAC and DOH recommendations, but all revision must have IRB approval before DOH approval.  
6 Department of Health EMS Office must respond to primary investigator within thirty days of receiving PEHSC and Regional MAC recommendations. 7 DOH EMSO notifies investigator, PEHSC and region (s) of approval.  
Approved May 1, 2002	Page 3 of 4 

NEW DRUG / DEVICE / TECHNIQUE APPROVAL PROCESS 
PROPOSAL INCLUDING: 
•	
 Background of use in EMS 

•	
Clinical need for advice, drug, and/or technique 

• 
Specifications for use: 

•	
 Indications 

•	
 Restrictions 

• 
Adverse Effects 

• 
Contraindications 



• 
Training Module 



Approved May 1, 2002 Page 4 of 4 


