<title>Prehospital Registered Nurse (PHRN) Application Process</title>
Prehospital Registered Nurse (PHRN) Application Process 
Requirements: 
1.
 Current Pennsylvania RN License. 

2.
 Current Healthcare Provider CPR. 

3.
 Current ACLS Certification. 


Recommended: 
1.
 PALS or APLS Certification 

2.
 BTLS or PHTLS certification. 


Process: 
1.	Contact Nancy at EMSI (412-242-7322) or ntheilacker@emsi04.org and provide the following information: 
a.	
Name, full address, phone number, date of birth and social security number. 

b.	
EMT number if certified as an EMT or paramedic number if certified as paramedic. 

c.	
If certified as an EMT, indicate the date and location of most recent practical exam if less than one year ago. (See #5 below) 


2.	
You will be sent a packet of information including a Student Application, and a Criminal History Reporting Form. 

3.	
Complete forms and return to Scott Crawford at EMSI. 

4.	
Enclose copies of RN license, Healthcare Provider CPR, ACLS and optional             cards if applicable. 

5.	
If paperwork is complete, you will receive a letter granting permission to         schedule an EMT practical. You also have the option of taking the National         Registry Paramedic Practical instead of the EMT-Basic Practical. If you         took an EMT practical within one year before the date you will take your         PHRN written exam, you will not have to take another EMT Practical exam. 

6.	
Once you have passed the EMT Practical, you will receive a letter granting             you permission to take the National Registry Written Assessment exam.  

7.	
Payment for the Written Assessment exam must be made by Certified Bank     Check or Money Order in the amount of $50 payable to NREMT. If you have             completed a PA Dept. of Health PHRN Course or have a letter from a              potential employer that is a PA licensed ambulance or aeromedical service,              the PA Dept. of Health will pay for your initial written assessment exam and  the first retest if you fail the initial exam. 

8. 	
Once you pass this exam, your paperwork will be processed and you will          receive a PHRN certificate of recognition. 


Notes: 
•	
A PA licensed registered nurse who is also a currently certified paramedic with current ACLS certification can apply for PHRN recognition and no testing is required. 

•	
There is no charge for the EMT Practical. 

•	
If you do not pass the National Registry Written Assessment exam within one year of passing the EMT Practical, you will be required to retake another EMT Practical before your next National Registry Written Assessment exam. 

•	
After passing the National Registry Written Assessment exam, you will not receive any National Registry certification. You will only be recognized as a PHRN by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

•	
A PHRN cannot apply for Paramedic certification. The only way to become a paramedic is to complete a Paramedic course that follows the National Standard Curriculum, then successfully complete a National Registry Practical and Written exam. 

•	
A PHRN is required to obtain a minimum of 18 continuing education credits per year with at least 9 hours in medical/trauma related areas, to maintain medical command authorization. 

•	
Websites of interest to the PHRN Candidate: 

o	The Official website of Emergency Medical Service Institute. 

www.emsi04.org – 

o	PA Department of Health – EMS Homepage. 




http://webserver.health.state.pa.us/health/cwp/view.asp?a=170&Q=203353 
o	National Registry website 

o	National Highway Transportation Safety Administration Website. You can download the National Standard Curriculum for EMT-Basic and Paramedic from this website. There is no charge for this download as of June, 10, 2002. 


www.nremt.org 
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/ems/nsc.htm#emt 

