<title>EMSI Intercom newsletter, September 2003</title>

Fall 2003

The Pioneers of EMS

Legends Leaders Visionaries 

hese are words that encapsulate the individuals who were a part of the early days of EMS in western Pennsylvania – a place where history was made on many counts. These are the profound words that best describe the men and women who dedicated their lives to the success of the field of EMS in this region over the years. And these are the words that will forever be etched in the memories of those who were fortunate enough to have known some of the following individuals who made EMS what it is today. To these individuals, we say thank you for your dedication, your fortitude, your care and your commitment to EMS. 
continued on page 2 

The touching stories featured in this issue are just a small sampling of the many courageous men and women who were a part of EMS history in this region. Time and space did not allow publication of all of the dedicated people who contributed over the years. 
Pioneers continued from cover 
Physicians Bring Emergency Medicine 

to the Streets 
Dr. Peter Safar (deceased) 
The world of emergency medical services would not be what it is today if not for the innovative thinking, research and hard work of Dr. Peter Safar. An anesthesiologist by training, Dr. Safar revolutionized emergency care and was known as the father of modern day cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
An innovator and a mentor, Dr. Safar is best known for his work in CPR in the 
The world of emergency medical services would not be what it is today if not for the innovative thinking, research and hard work of Dr. Peter Safar. 
1950s and 1960s that set the standard and is still being used today. At that time, he initiated the change from manual to mouth-to-mouth artificial ventila­tion worldwide. In experiments on human volunteers, he developed CPR step A and step B, then 
combined the two steps into basic life support. Several years later, he extended CPR to include the nine steps of basic, advanced and prolonged life support. He also co-initiated modern life support first aid, resuscitation and intensive critical care medicine. 

involved in extensive emergency medical technician and paramedic training, including starting basic and advanced ambulance attendants training through the Freedom House Project in Pittsburgh. 
Because of his extensive work with CPR, Dr. Safar was a founding member of the American Heart Association’s CPR committee and the U.S. National Research Council’s Committee on EMS, where he developed the first guidelines for CPR and the first CPR instructor’s course. 
He took his newfound knowledge of CPR outside of the hospital and made a commitment to developing methods that could be used by non-medical personnel. These visionary steps led to today’s understanding by the general public of the need to know CPR in the case of an emergency where medical personnel are not immediately available. 
Working side by side with Jerry Esposito, he helped create the first guidelines for community-wide emergency medical services. Together, they developed the national standards for ambulance design and equipment, revolutionizing the concept of medical transport. They were also 

Dr. Peter Safar 

Throughout his illustrious career, Dr. Safar remained dedicated to peaceful medicine and human rights. He was well known internationally and sat on numerous committees and association boards. This past year, the World Association for Disaster Medicine named its annual award in his honor. 
In addition to his presence in world­wide medical and EMS affairs, Dr. Safar was an author, editor and co-editor of the first textbooks on respiratory thera­py, CPCR and emergency medicine. He authored 1,389 articles for professional publication, wrote more than 30 books and manuals, and published more than 300 abstracts. 
After his retirement in 1979, Dr. Safar founded the International Resuscitation Research Center at the University of Pittsburgh, where he mentored 60 physicians and 20 medical student research fellows. Several years later, the center was renamed the Safar Center for Resuscitation Research in honor of its founder. Dr. Safar remained involved in research programs on cardiac arrest, trauma and suspended anima­tion for many years. 
In an article written by Mike Mitka in the May 21, 2003 edition of the Journal of American Medicine, Dr. Safar was fondly remembered not only for his innovative work in CPR, but also for his humanitarianism and commitment to helping others. 
“His innovative work in cardiopul-monary-cerebral resuscitation alone would assure Safar an honored place in the annals of medicine,” Mitka wrote. “But his life-giving talents are not limit­ed to medical practice and medical research. In his long career, his humanity and respect for people have enriched students, colleagues and friends.” 
Dr. Don Benson 
As an anesthesiologist, Dr. Don Benson has spent his lifetime medically main­taining his patients’ vital systems, from airways to pulmonary care to ventila­tion. It’s this anesthesiology training that led him to his lifelong interest and involvement in the care of critically ill patients – both in the operating room and on the streets. 
As early as his days in medical school in the 1960s, Dr. Benson had a keen understanding and need to take what he was learning everyday in the hospital setting and transferring it to the EMS care that he knew in his heart was a real possibility. 
As a teenager, Dr. Benson began a long and fulfilling career when, as a Boy Scout, he learned basic water rescue. This sparked an interest that led to him 
continued on page 4 

Dr. Don Benson, third from right, with the Freedom House crew on their inaugural run on June 16, 1968. This photo was taken at the ambulance entrance to Presbyterian University Hospital. 

Pioneers continued from page 3 
attending waterfront school where he learned the basics of manual respiration and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Little did he know at the time how his mentor-to-be, Dr. Peter Safar, the founder of CPR, was influencing his life for the first of many times. 
When he attended Georgetown University School of Medicine, CPR was just starting to be introduced in the operating room. Dr. Benson’s earlier training in this area coupled with this newfound use in the OR led him to a revelation that the basics of anesthesiology in a hospital could be transferred to saving lives outside of the hospital setting. This led Dr. Benson to Dr. Safar, who offered him a critical care anesthesiology residency at the University of Pittsburgh. Dr. Benson accepted the residency with the distinct goal of taking the training he learned about anesthesiology and vital system maintenance to ambulances and onto the streets. 
While working with Dr. Safar, Dr. Benson became involved with the Freedom House project where underprivileged residents from the Hill District were trained to be ambulance attendants. He helped develop a curriculum that even­tually led to the basic standards for what is today’s EMT training. He also became involved with Dr. Safar and Jerry Esposito’s establishment of the production of ambulances based on the Freedom House standards he was instrumental in developing. 
After serving several years in active duty in the Air Force, Dr. Benson returned to the Freedom House in 1971 where he was asked to develop a more advanced paramedic program in Allegheny County. He turned to the Volunteer Fire Departments and started working with the Elfinwild Fire Department, where he trained them in advanced medical work administering IVs and using defibrillators. There, he worked closely with Dr. Jesse Weigle, director of the Emergency Department at North Hills Passavant Hospital and Ralph Obenoff, chief of the Elfinwild Fire Department, to develop the first ALS suburban volunteer service where firemen were trained as paramedics. 
“This led to a growing recognition of the importance of advanced care in the street,” explained Dr. Benson. “Once Elfinwild successfully trained its crews, other fire departments wanted to do similar training.” 
Shortly after these successes, Dr. Benson moved to Canton, OH to work in anesthesiology at a large community hospital. But his interest and dedication to EMS did not stop with the move. 
“I felt a high need to make an effort to see that our work was perpetuated after I left Pittsburgh,” notes Dr. Benson. “So I worked with local institutions to adopt our pilot programs.” 
In Canton, he founded the Stark County Paramedic Program, where more than 500 paramedics in a five-county area were trained over the 16 years he oversaw the project. He also earned his Doctor of Education degree in the mid 1980s and worked in various capacities including anesthesiology, medical administration and medical education. 
Dr. Benson left the field of EMS in 1990 and dedicated his efforts to practicing anesthesiology for a large group practice until his retirement in 2002. He continues to stay active providing vacation relief work for anesthesiologists nationwide. 
Although he is not intimately involved in EMS anymore, Dr. Benson remembers fondly and with a great deal of pride the work he and the other pioneers accomplished. 
“I look back on my EMS career with a real sense of accomplishment,” explains Dr. Benson. “I learned more from the Freedom House people than they learned from me. It was a time to change the world…it certainly changed my world.” 

Dr. Nancy Caroline (deceased) 
Nancy L. Caroline, MD, was never one to stay behind the scenes. Rather she could be seen on the front lines of the EMS revolution. 
Best known in the community for her work with the Freedom House ambulance service with Dr. Peter Safar, Dr. Caroline was actively involved in training the young unemployed men in Pittsburgh’s Hill District who became some of the first highly trained technicians in the country. This innovative program took disadvantaged individuals and gave them the skills, and the fully equipped ambulances, to offer EMS services to that area. The medical director at the Freedom House, Dr. Caroline was known to ride regularly on the ambulances to find out what it was like to provide emergency care outside the hospital. Through a U.S. Department of Transportation contract, she helped develop a national training course for paramedics and put the Freedom House on the map as a proving ground for national standards. 

But her work in EMS began before she set foot into the Freedom House operation. A 1966 summa cum laude and Phi Beta Cappa graduate from Radcliffe-Harvard, Dr. Caroline came to the University of Pittsburgh as an internist in 1973 to train in critical care medicine under Dr. Safar. There she helped rewrite the national guidelines for training for advanced EMTs (EMT II) under a contract with the U.S. Department of Transportation. The training focused on the administering of IV fluids, drugs, and defibrillation – a relatively new concept in emergency medical care at that time. Her textbook entitled Emergency Care in the Streets became the standard for training emergency medical service personnel when it was released in 1979. 
With a great deal of foresight, she was quoted in a Pittsburgh Press article in 1975 as saying that the “experience of large, modern ambulance systems indicates the quality of care under strong physician command via radio is as good as what physicians can do at the scene.” That same year, Dr. Caroline developed a course at Allegheny Community College for EMT II training that included Freedom House and Community College students. 
As a result of her early years of training, Dr. Caroline made major inroads in other parts of the world during her career. In 1976, she moved to Israel and became the medical director of Magen David Adom, the country’s ambulance service provider. While there, she insisted that mobile intensive care units be used and that all patients be reached by ambulance within three minutes. She also spent five years as a bush doctor in East Africa, sharing her medical knowledge with non-physician caregivers. When she returned to Israel, she set up a hospice to provide trained care to cancer patients. She passed away from cancer in December 2002. 
In remembering Dr. Caroline, Dr. Safar noted at the time that the Freedom House program “gave Caroline the opportunity to demonstrate her excep­tional skills in laying hands on victims in emergencies outside the hospital.” 
Other colleagues affectionately called her “Israel’s Mother Theresa.” And in everyone’s eyes who knew her, Dr. Caroline was an advocate for and firm believer in the importance of EMS in saving lives worldwide. 
Dr. Allen Schattner 
Cardiac life support and trauma support are the heart of modern-day EMS services. But for Dr. Allen Schattner, the 1970s saw a surge in the intensity of training in these crucial areas that led the way for the quality EMTs that are on the road today. 
As the EMS medical co-director and head emergency room physician at Columbia Health Center in Wilkinsburg, which is now Forbes Metro, Schattner was on the leading edge of training and medical command in the region. In the early 1970s, he started a medical command program at Columbia that led to his involvement with Glenn Cannon in the mid 1970s. At that time, Glenn was involved with Citizens Ambulance Service in Indiana and was interested in 
continued on page 7 Pioneers continued from page 5 



Dr. Schattner’s medical command successes. Glenn wanted Dr. Schattner to help develop a similar program for the newly formed EMS Services in the Eastern suburban services including Monroeville, Penn Hills, Forest Hills and Wilkins-Churchill. 
Dr. Schattner gladly agreed and began a paramedic training program that focused on cardiac and trauma support. He moved the training into the hospital and started the first hospital-based medical command system. This allowed many of the paramedics in the field to receive advice and information from a physician who was on-site at the hospital. 
“Before this time, the ambulances just brought the patient into the hospital…it was scoop ’em and bring them in. The ambulance crews had no real medical training,” explains Dr. Schattner. 
So Dr. Schattner and several critical care and emergency department nurses trained paramedics in an extensive 80-hour 13-week course designed for advanced critical care and trauma training. The training also included 20 hours a month working under hospital conditions to maintain skills. Over a three-year period, from 1973-76, Dr. Schattner and his group trained 117 paramedics for Pittsburgh EMS and other suburban ambulance services in Allegheny County. 
He offered paramedic training and medical command for approximately 10 years until Columbia became Forbes Metro in 1980. He continued to work in the emergency room and doing medical command until his retirement in 1992. During this time, he was (and remains) on the training committee and Board of Directors of EMSI. 
After 30 years in the emergency room peppered with intensive paramedic training and medical command work, Dr. Schattner is proud of the strides that have been taken over the years in this area. And he is particularly pleased to have been a part of so many people’s work in the field. 
“I trained a lot of paramedics over the years,” Dr. Schattner reflects. “There are a lot of supervisors and leaders in Pittsburgh who were in my classes. I’m so proud to have trained so many top-of-the-line people.” 
Dr. James A. Garrettson Jr. 
Dr. James A. Garrettson Jr. spent a lifetime taking his EMT work home with him – literally. 
As a pioneer in the development of telemetry EKGs from the field in the mid 1970s, Dr. Garrett was intimately involved in the early medical command system at Citizens’ Ambulance Service. An emergency physician in private practice, Dr Garrett worked closely with EMTs in the field to send EKGs via the phone line to his office, where he would prescribe intervention. In order to provide 24-hour access, he and his partner literally took the telemetry equipment home with them in a Samsonite suitcase every evening. 
Within a few years of developing this portable system, Dr. Garrett initiated the first medical command in Indiana County for local emergency rooms where there was no full time emergency staff. This included developing and teaching courses on paramedic training and modules on airway management training. 
“In the 1970s, this type of training program was not well received until it was proven that this training saved lives; then it became accepted,” explains Dr. Garrett. 
The training started with approximately 12 EMTs from substations around the 

Dr. James Garrettson Jr. 

county, and then grew exponentially as paramedics from all substations began to seek training. Eventually, after the educa­tional components became standardized, Indiana University of Pennsylvania took over the extensive training sessions. 
“I was hardly ever home,” admits Dr. Garrettson of his early days of teaching. “I was always out teaching or doing lesson plans. Now various colleges in the region teach these courses.” 
Several years later, Dr. Garrettson was named the director of the Emergency Department at Indiana Hospital, but continued to work in an advisory capacity on protocols for EMT training. He also remained as the medical director of Citizens’ Ambulance Service. He still serves on the Board of Directors for Citizens’ and is on staff at the hospital. 
Dr. Garrettson looks back with pride on the number, and types of people, he trained over the years. 
“There has been a tremendous and dedicated group of men and women who came through the program,” notes Dr. Garrettson. “I’m so proud to be associated with all of them.” 
continued on page 8 

Dr. Howard Monsour (deceased) 
Dr. Howard Monsour was one of those rare emergency medicine physicians who wanted deeply to get involved in the emerging field of EMS. Dr. Monsour saw firsthand how a coordinated EMS effort could impact the advancement of emergency medicine in 13 counties. 
As an early board member for EMSI, Dr. Monsour attended meetings and promoted the importance of emergency medical training on the advancement of the field. As an emergency physician and one of the founders of Monsour Medical Center, Dr. Monsour was a visionary who worked tirelessly to promote improvements in the medical care of patients in the prehospital setting. 
Dr. John Paluso (deceased) 
If ever there was a physician in this area who was dedicated to the field of emergency medicine, it was John R. Paluso, MD. The former president of the medical staff and director of Emergency Medicine at Monongahela Valley Hospital passed away in 2002. 

Recognized as one of the first emergency medical specialists in the nation, Dr. Paluso dedicated his professional career to emergency medicine for close to 30 years. This commitment to his career carried over into the field of EMS. 
His leadership in EMS started in 1972, when he created the first certified emergency medical technician program in Pennsylvania. As the medical director of this innovative program, he held training at the Washington Hospital. 
In 1973, Dr. Paluso was a leader in forming the Washington County Emergency Medical Council, where he served as president from 1973-1976. He organized and established the first CPR, ACLS, EMT and paramedic training courses in Washington County. He also was the Washington County medical director for one of the first paramedic training programs held in the Commonwealth. 
A Pittsburgh area native, Dr. Paluso attended medical school at the age of 29, receiving his degree in medicine and surgery from the University of 
Bologna School of 
Medicine and Surgery 
in Italy. He headed 
the emergency 
departments at 
Washington Hospital, 
Charleroi-Monessen 
Hospital and 
Monongahela Valley 
Hospital during this 
career. In 2002, he 
retired as the 
Emergency 
Department director 
at Monongahela. 
At the 25th anniversary 
of the Washington 
County Emergency Medical Services Council, Dr. Paluso was presented with an award for his role as one of the “persons contributing the most to the development and continued support of EMS in Washington County.” He was honored along with Dr. William Pearson, former director of EMS at the Washington Hospital. 
In remarks made at the anniversary ceremony, Linda Zidek, RN, prehospital coordinator at Monongahela Valley Hospital and president of the Washington Council EMSC Board of Directors, noted: “Dr. Paluso and Bill are most deserving of these awards. Their many years of commitment to and support of quality emergency medical services in the community and in the region are unparalleled.” 
Dr. Clara Jean Ersoz (deceased) 
With great finesse and diplomacy, Dr. Clara Jean Ersoz was a woman who excelled at the art of bringing people together for a cause. 
She began her career at the University of Pittsburgh, where she was the first fellow in the newly formed Critical Care Medicine Program developed by Dr. Peter Safar at Presbyterian-University Hospital. An anesthesiologist, Dr. Ersoz was appointed medical director of Presby’s ICU in 1966. In 1970, she joined the staff at St. Clair Hospital as director of the ICU and later served as the vice president of Medical Affairs until her retirement in 1993. 
Dr. Ersoz’s expertise in team building was put the test when she brought together government officials from seven municipalities, EMS experts, and police departments to develop EMS systems that included professional paramedics and EMTs in the South Hills area. Under her leadership, St. Clair Hospital provided the medical direction, including the first medical review board to oversee the field performance of each paramedic under St. Clair’s command. This was the first time in the county that communities joined together to provide shared services. 


“Clara Jean was truly a woman with great finesse and diplomacy,” remembers Mary Ann Scott. Through her guidance, Medical Rescue Team South was formed in 1975 for the communities of Mt. Lebanon, Castle Shannon, Baldwin Township and Dormont. In 1978, she helped form Tri-Community South EMS for the communities of Bethel Park, South Park and Upper St. Clair. Her vision and concepts were used as a model for other Allegheny County municipalities developing EMS systems. 
Dr. Ersoz also was responsible for St. Clair Hospital becoming a leader in pre­hospital oversight as the hospital began innovative radio transmissions of EKG’s to the hospital’s Emergency Department. At the same time, Emergency Department physicians directed care to the paramedic in the field from the hospital. 
While she commanded the technical aspects of the EMS movement in the area, she also offered a very personal touch to those she worked with daily. 
“Clara Jean made it her task to know each and every EMT and paramedic under her command,” according to Scott. “She praised them, acknowledged their outstanding performances, and was their counselor when needed. She provided their on-going continuing education until her retirement. She was truly dedicated and committed to see good EMS, which inspired all of the Emergency Department staff and pre­hospital personnel.” 
Dr. Ersoz passed away in the crash of TWA 800 off the waters of New York City. Of her untimely death, Scott reflects, “her death created a void for many in EMS as she was our beloved friend and our mentor until the day she died.” 

Practitioners in the Field Lead Revolution to


Change EMS Forever 
Jerry Esposito (deceased) 
Jerry Esposito was a visionary. Undoubtedly one of the major leaders of EMS in this region, Jerry’s vision influenced thousands of people, who proudly call him their mentor and their friend for the way he touched their lives. 
Western Pennsylvania is well known for its contributions to the advent of modern EMS. At the forefront of its illustrious past was a man who made history, both locally and nationally, with his dedication to the field – Jerry Esposito. 
Credited with developing a common model for providing community emergency 

that are on the road today. And, most importantly, Esposito was a leader in elevat­ing the role of the EMT to its current professional status. 
“Jerry was the guiding light in Pittsburgh and across the country,” recalls Ed Hutchinson, an early pioneer himself in the Westmoreland 
section of western Pennsylvania. “He was just so 
ahead of his time. No one else under­stood what EMS was all about at that time, but Jerry had the vision and was way ahead of all of us.” 
continued on page 10 
care that has been adopted by ambulance services nationwide, Esposito was one of the fathers of modern day EMS in Pennsylvania. He is well known for his development and design of ambulances 

Practitioners continued from page 9 
Esposito’s legacy began in post WWII, when he and his wife, Elizabeth, operated an ambulance service out of their Punxsutawney home. Using the family station wagon as an ambulance, Esposito saw firsthand what his patients needed during that critical time between home and hospital. What he saw in the 1950s and 1960s was an antiquated sys­tem in which care did not begin until the patients were wheeled into the emergency room at the hospital. 
Ambulance “…No one else services were understood merely speedy 
transportation. what EMS was But Esposito 
all about at knew there 
was a role for that time, but qualified pro-
Jerry had the fessionals to be trained to providevision and was prehospital 
way ahead of medical care, 
especially forall of us.” those patients 
Ed Hutchinson 
where this 
precious time spent in an ambulance meant the differ­ence between life and death. 
So Esposito did something about it. He worked with a local women’s civic group to establish Citizens’ Ambulance Service (CAS) in Indiana in 1964. There he formulated the idea for a community­owned ambulance service fueled by annual subscriptions from local citizens. Later, he incorporated a relatively new idea in EMS: offering a countywide service where rural pockets could be aided by the larger stations in the service area. He then formed a management company entitled Ambulance Service Management Corporation (ASMC) that, to this day, still operates CAS. 
“CAS was his creation and his life’s work, and every one of us who has been involved with CAS over the years considers Jerry to be our mentor,” remembers James D. Bowser, a longtime personal and professional associate, and former CEO of ASMC states. 
“That’s a lot of people,” concurs Charles Cressley, CEO of Jefferson County EMS. “ It signifies the impact Jerry had on EMS personnel, other agencies, and communities in this region.” 
While at Citizens’, Esposito actively developed training curriculums and standards for EMTs and paramedics who would be given the knowledge and expertise to provide advanced life support on the road. While similar programs were being developed nationwide, Esposito was the first to introduce such a concept in the western Pennsylvania area. He also established the first radio communication between ambulance crews and a base hospital – a standard that is essential to today’s quality patient care. Esposito was also credited with providing leadership, as his service was one of the first to render successful field cardiac defibrillation. 
His vision is most notable on an inter­national level for each and every EMT who steps into a modern day ambulance. Along with world-renowned physician Dr. Peter Safar, Esposito helped to redesign early ambulances. In the 1960s, ambulances were utility vehicles that just provided simple transportation, not highly specialized medical care. But Esposito and Safar took a closer look and redesigned the shape and function of ambulance to standards that are still being used in modern vehicles. 
Over the years, Esposito trained countless young men and women on critical ambulance prehospital procedures – activities that started with “scoop and swoop” to their current role as the essential medical link to thousands of lives saved yearly. As an advocate for making the EMS role one that is based on extensive training and expertise, he logged a lifetime of hours training many of the men and women who are now leaders in EMS in the region and throughout the country. Almost anyone associated with EMS in the region knew him, worked with him, trained with him, or were trained by his own students. 
During his 28 years as the manager and CEO of Citizens’ Ambulance, Esposito had a commanding presence in EMS management regionally and nationally. He founded the Pennsylvania Ambulance Association and the Paramedical Journal, and organized and directed the 
continued on page 12 Practitioners continued from page 10 



Allegheny County Council of Emergency Health Services (now the Emergency Medical Services Institute – EMSI). This was the first council of its type in the country that provided representation by all county EMS services on its regional board. 
Jerry was also instrumental in the devel­opment of the Freedom House project where unemployed black men from a disadvantaged district of Pittsburgh were trained to be ambulance attendants. He sat on more than 25 state, national and global committees and organizations. He authored numerous articles published in national emergency medical service journals and was honored with the 1985 Distinguished Achievement Award by the American Trauma Society and the Lifetime Achievement Award by EMSI. 
Because he touched the lives of so many, those who were closest to him remember him with great fondness and reverence. 
“It is almost impossible to put into words what Jerry’s contribution has been to the EMS community statewide and nationally,” explains John Campos, executive vice president of the northeastern EMS Council. “Some call Jerry the father of Pennsylvania EMS, as he is, but he is also the pioneer of the this country’s EMS standards with his ideas, innovations and forward thinking that set the stage for EMS as we know it today in its’ pre­hospital format. He was my best friend.” 
B.J. Pino, his longtime friend and currentchief operating officer of Citizens’ agrees. 
“Jerry told me on several occasions that he had experienced a good life, one that was fulfilling, especially with his wonderful family and unique career. He was right.” 
Glenn Cannon 
Glenn Cannon is a well-known figure in the Pittsburgh region, especially in the homes and offices of EMS personnel. Glenn’s history with EMS goes back to his early days when he worked side-by-side with other pioneers in the field. 
Glenn’s interest in EMS began when he was a young man in college in Indiana, PA. On one fateful night a man drove his car into a tree in front of one of Indiana’s fraternity houses. Glenn was there and went to the man’s aid. He found him not breathing and began mouth-to-mouth resuscitation until the local ambulance arrived. The man’s life was saved thanks to Glenn’s quick action and the work of the Citizens’ Ambulance Service personnel, including none other than Jerry Esposito. Glenn knew at that moment that he wanted to be involved in the work of saving lives. 
Shortly after that Glenn signed up with Citizens’, working on the ambulance. He was able to take part in the first CPR class ever offered for non-physicians, which was led by another legend, Dr. Peter Safar. While still in college, Glenn became increasingly involved in the field of EMS. He worked closely with Esposito, Safer and Dr. Don Benson on designing the first ambulance that allowed a seat to be placed at the head of the patient for proper airway maintenance during transit. He also helped train the new Freedom House Ambulance workers who traveled to Indiana County to work in Citizens’ vehicles. 
After college, Glenn returned to Pittsburgh and became involved in the creation of the first EMS council in 1972 where he was the deputy director under Esposito’s leadership. The Allegheny County Council on Emergency Medical and Health Services, later named Emergency Medical Service Institute (EMSI), developed the process of training and certifying ambulance personnel as emergency medical technicians. While with the Council, Glenn was active in helping many communities secure funding through the National Highway Safety Act to help fund training programs, and purchase new vehicles and equipment. It was also during this time that Glenn helped many community colleges and vo-tech schools create EMT training programs, including the first EMT instructor’s course at Allegheny County Community College. 
In 1975, Glenn was hired by the City of Pittsburgh to plan, develop and implement a new advanced life support ambulance system. He was named the director of the newly formed City of Pittsburgh Bureau of Emergency Medical Services and oversaw the transition from the old “rapid transit” police ambulance service to the highly sophisticated ambulance service staffed by paramedics trained in emergency medicine. The paramedics used radio-equipped “super ambulances” that were categorized as the first mobile intensive care units to operate city-wide out of five stations in the West End, South Hills, North Side, East End and Hill District areas of the city. 
Glenn remained active in rescue and other non-traditional ambulance work. He was able to successfully expand the EMS service into the areas of paramedic rescue, river rescue, trench and specialized rescue. He also created the City of Pittsburgh’s first hazardous materials response team, the first in Pennsylvania. 
Glenn worked with a number of the early physician pioneers to bring about quality prehospital emergency care in the days before the State EMS Act and State paramedic certification. 

“They were all physicians that put their medical licenses on the line to help these new paramedics save lives in the community,” explains Glenn. 
He also worked Dr. Sol Edelstein and Dr. Nancy Caroline on developing an active medical command system that included emergency physicians in the prehospital process of service delivery. The concept grew rapidly into what is today’s Center for Emergency Medicine and the affiliated emergency medicine residency. Glenn was an original Advisory Board Member for the residency program. 
The medical command concept grew from the novel idea that physicians from local hospitals could train ambulance personnel with the skills needed to save lives in the field. They then would provide on-going medical support from the hospital to EMTs as they continued to administer medical care in the ambulance before arrival at the hospital. 
“The physicians were really the early pioneers in training EMTs,” explains Glenn. “They did the first training program for EMTs in Pennsylvania here in Allegheny County and they were very dedicated to the success of the program.” 
In the mid 1980s, Glenn was named the City of Pittsburgh Public Safety director where he continued his advocacy for EMS, from training 911 call takers in giving pre-arrival instructions to callers in need, to adding the fire department first responders to the EMS system. 
Throughout his years of success, however, Glenn has always been cognizant of the leaders in the early years of EMS who paved the way for the modern day system. 0and Peter (Safar) during the early movement,” states Glenn. “They were 
truly the giants…they never stopped until EMS was an acceptable way of doing business. We had a lot of support and these men were always there to help.” 

Bracken Burns works with Public Safety workers in his role as the Washington County EMS coordinator. 
Bracken Burns 
As the first paid EMS coordinator in the state, Bracken Burns has EMS in his blood. His public career began in the early 1970s when he coordinated the Washington County EMS Council as a subcontract under EMSI. As the staff director, he was whisked into the world of EMS, which was beginning to grow at a frenetic pace. 
“It was a very exciting time in EMS development,” explains Bracken. “It was the beginning period of enlightenment with advancements in training, vehicle development, communication and equipment just hitting the streets.” 
Bracken helped organize EMT and para­medic training for the Washington County area while working diligently on trying to obtain funding for his ambulance services. 
“The training really moved it all,” notes Bracken. “It gave people the skills and equipment to handle major medical emergencies.” 
These skills were not just limited to trained paramedics; rather they were starting to overflow to the general population. At that time, CPR and the concept of EMS were relatively new to the general public, and people were just beginning to realize the importance CPR. Bracken was at the forefront of some of the early training for the general public. He began teaching this life-saving measure five days a week…resulting in personally training thousands of people over several years. 
As the Washington County EMS coordinator, he worked with others from the county 
continued on page 14 Practitioners continued from page 13 

to set up training courses and develop the faculty to teach EMS and CPR cours­es. He also coordinated services on a regional, state and national level while 
working on Bracken was obtaining crucial funding to keepat the fore-the program a success.
front of some 
of the early But his love of training for EMS began before his days
the general	as the EMS 
public.	coordinator. He started his career as a 
student in Indiana County where he worked under the direction of Jerry Esposito and side-by-side with Glenn Cannon. He took a job with the American Heart Association in Washington County, and then quickly became involved in the local ambulance service working nights and weekends. 
In 1972, Bracken graduated from the first Pennsylvania EMT class and immediately began his EMT II paramedic training. That same year, the Washington County EMS Council was formed and Bracken was named one of the first board members of this new group that began studying additional ways to offer EMT training programs in the region. In 1974, Bracken was hired to run the council, a job he held until 1996. In 1985 he assumed additional responsi­bilities as the director of the Emergency Management Agency for Washington County. In 1996 he was elected county commissioner for Washington County. 
Over the 22 years he was in charge, Bracken notes the Washington County EMS Council made some incredible strides. He said that thousands of EMTs were trained; thousands of community members learned CPR; and the 27 ambulance services were consolidated to ten so that training and equipment could be better utilized. 
Bracken speaks with pride of the devel­opment of a countywide Quick Response System(QRS) that, in many areas, evolved into a Paramedic QRS. This system, which utilizes the equipment and manpower of area fire departments, allows paramedics to respond to emergency calls from their homes, significantly reducing response times in rural areas. Washington County was the first to develop this revolutionary system that is now being used in other rural areas statewide. 
BILLING  
Ambulance Billing Specialists STOP AND SEE US AT EMS UPDATE 2003 - March 27-29th Seven Springs Mountain Resort SUPERIOR SERVICE AT COMPETITIVE RATES c Medicare signature authorizations c Medical necessity documentation c Patient insurance information c Calls to patients, hospitals, and insurance carriers c Joint ALS/BLS billing c Electronic claims submission c Electronic funds transfer Cornerstone ADMINISYSTEMS  
Call toll free: 877-214-7224 c info@casys.com c www.casys.com  


During his tenure with Washington County, Bracken also worked at the state level for the Pennsylvania Emergency Health Services Council and served as a board member. There he became involved in legislation, funding streams and setting priorities. He also wrote for the Pennsylvania Ambulance and EMT Association journals. For his years of service, he was honored by the Washington County EMS Council with a “greatest educator” award. 
Since he began his office as the county commissioner, Bracken has limited involvement in the EMS system. But it has not dampened his spirit and enthusiasm for the role EMS plays in the community. 
“EMS is wonderful work,” explains Bracken. “I could go home at the end of the day and really know I was making a difference. The students in the classes really absorbed the information that was being taught and they understood the medical significance of what they were doing. We really had something to offer and it was very gratifying.” 
Ed Hutchinson 
Ed Hutchinson is a fighter by nature. He’ll be the first to say he’d rather have a spirited discussion of issues than to sit back and not make his views known. It’s the arguments, in his opinion, that lead to the very best decisions being made. 
And Ed should know. He was involved in many disputes as the field of EMS went through its growing pains in the 1960s and 1970s. One of the early Emergency Medical Services Institute (EMSI) board members, Ed spent seven years on the board with pioneer Jerry Esposito at the helm. During his last two years on the board, Ed was vice president. 
As the representative for Westmoreland County, Ed worked side by side with Glenn Cannon, Bracken Burns and other leaders as 13 counties worked to establish a unified EMS council. As the representative for one of the smaller counties, Ed became an advocate for the more rural communities to ensure they had a voice on the board. 
In the mid 1960s, Ed helped develop the first state ambulance course at Westmoreland Hospital. At that time, ambulances were ill equipped to handle medical emergencies and undertakers in the area made many of the transports. In Westmoreland, many communities had no ambulance service at all. The course he helped develop trained EMTs to respond to calls and begin providing critical medical services while en route to the hospital, even from rural areas. This included mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, which Ed says Westmoreland County starting using years before the Red Cross adopted the standard. He attributes this to the ambulance services’ years of experience in the field and ability to easily implement such a program. 

“These were rough times because we were really going through some tough growing pains,” recalls Ed. “No one really understood what it was all about at the time.” 
Following the successful development of the ambulance course, Ed bought and built Mutual Aid Ambulance Service in the late 1960s, which has grown to be the third largest ambulance group in Pennsylvania. He owned the service for 20 years before handing over the reigns in the late 1980s. 
Throughout his long and successful EMS career, Ed always remained true to his first love: firefighting. He was the 
fire chief for the 
Greensburg 
Volunteer Fire 
Department for 
more than 50 years. 
Today, he sees the 
role of the fire 
department in 
relation to EMS 
services growing 
daily as ambulance 
services become 
over taxed. 
In many rural areas, 
the fire departments 
can play a large 
role in ambulance assists, especially with AED calls, explains Ed. Firefighters in Westmoreland County are equipped with AEDs, thanks to the work of Dr. Richard Kunkle, a physician at Latrobe Area Hospital, who was instrumental in raising funds and developing a system for placing AEDs in the community. 
“The AEDs have saved a lot of lives,” states Ed as he thinks of what is in store for EMS in the coming years. “They are the future of emergency medical care in rural areas.” 


Nurses Bring Care and Knowledge to EMS


Millie Fincke, far right, was instrumental in bringing the first hospital-based helicopter service to Pittsburgh. Millie is pictured here with the LifeFlight emergency nurses who flew on the first flight 25 
years ago. 
Mildred Fincke 
Millie Fincke knows firsthand the valuable role that nurses play in the field of EMS. She put this knowledge to good work when she was actively involved in helping to set the standard of care for nurse practitioners in this region’s early days of EMS. 
Deep in her heart, Millie always knew that emergency physicians and emergency room nurses were at the core of good quality care as the EMS profession began to take shape. She began working closely with Allegheny General Hospital to set up an Emergency Nurse Practitioner Program that became a model for nurse practitioner programs across the country. Her efforts led to the founding of the Western Pennsylvania Emergency Nurses Association in Pittsburgh. 
In 1974, Millie began working with Glenn Cannon to write and secure a grant from the US Department of Health and Welfare Public Health Services for the Emergency/Ambulatory Nurse Practitioner Program – a revolutionary program, in emergency room nursing. A Presidential grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation followed, allowing for the continuation of the Emergency Nurse Practitioner Program that would set the stage for nurse practitioners to become key professionals in emergency departments nationwide. Traveling across the country, Millie set up programs similar to Pittsburgh’s at the University of Texas Medical School at Herman Hospital in Houston; the University of Alabama-Birmingham Medical School of Nursing; Nebraska Methodist Hospital in Omaha; Good Samaritan Hospital and Medical Center in Portland, Oregon; and Maricopa County General Hospital in Phoenix, Arizona. 
Over the years, she saw more than 300 nurses graduate from Allegheny General’s program, which included students from as far away as British Columbia and Hawaii, all coming to learn how they could play a vital role in emergency medicine. 
“I was a real pusher for nurses in EMS,” explains Millie. “I knew the nurses could be of help in an emergency room performing a variety of activities like minor suturing. This overflowed into the area of EMS as we all worked together to make sure our nurses were well trained.” 
That’s where her role as a member of EMSI came to fruition. As an original board member of EMSI, Millie was actively working with EMS services to “get doctors and nurses working together with the hospitals to be sure that there were qualified personnel available to treat all patients the way they should be treated.” 

A constant advocate on the national scene, Millie was a board member for the Emergency Nurses Association established in 1970. She also served as president of that organization in 1975. It was at the University of Texas at Herman Hospital where she first saw up close and personal a successful helicopter transport system. She was so impressed that she began working with personnel at Allegheny General Hospital to establish helicopter services in Pittsburgh. Several years later, Allegheny General lent its full support to the program and in September 1978 started the first hospital-based helicopter service (LifeFlight) in the region. At the forefront of the new program were emergency nurse practitioners who went on runs and provided basic care for patients through air to ground communication with emergency room physicians. 
“There were always extremely good emergency department nurses in the helicopter program,” reminisces Millie. “Our nurses knew what to do in the helicopter and they were always well trained. They still have good emergency room nurses in the program today.” 
Millie’s local and national notoriety came about from humble beginnings when she graduated from the Allegheny General Hospital School of Nursing in 1947. The day she graduated, the hospital appointed her head nurse in the emergency room, a job she held until 1952 when she took a short break to have her first of two sons. In 1958, she returned to Allegheny General to help in the Emergency Department during a severe flu epidemic. She then moved to North Hills Passavant Hospital as the supervisor in the Emergency Department and instructor in the Emergency Procedures and CPR program before returning to Allegheny General in Emergency Nursing and Ambulatory Services in 1966. She eventually worked her way 
continued on page 18 Nurses continued from page 17 

up to the position of associate vice president of the Emergency Department in 1982. After a four-year stint at Beaver Medical Center, Millie once again returned to Allegheny General where she was named vice president of Nursing – the first Allegheny General nursing graduate to hold such a position. Six years later, she retired and began a life of consulting. 
Retirement, however, did not slow her down. She remained on the board of the American Trauma Society and keeps in touch with her favorite brainchild – LifeFlight. She also continued to work in the field of EMS, working as an advocate to ensure that EMS continued to grow and thrive as a profession. 

“I’m still active today,” says Millie 

www.emsi04.org
confidently. “There were a lot of struggles over the years to make EMS what it is 

Always at Your Service

today. I’m proud of the role nurses have played in the progress that has been made. 

THANKS 


EMS Update 2004 
Special thanks are extended 
March 25 - 27, 2004 to Mary Ann Scott, who 
contributed countless

Seven Springs Resort 
hours -- and memories -­

to making this special

Mark your 
edition of EMSI Intercom

calendar now! 
a reality. 


Officers 
•
William E. Groft, EMT-P, President 

•
Michael Coleman, DO, Vice President 

•
Mary Ann Scott, RN, BSN, Treasurer 

•
Douglas Garretson, BA, NREMT-P, Secretary 

•
Richard F. Kunkle, MD, FACEP, Past President 


EMS Council Representatives 
•
Russell Chiodo, Beaver 

•
Mike Coleman, DO, Butler Cataldo Corrado, MD, Fayette Rick Huff, Washington George Laskey, Westmoreland Jim Sadler, Indiana 

•
Mary Ann Scott, Allegheny

•
Brian Shaw, Lawrence Doug Young, Greene 


County Government Representatives 
Chief Bob Full, Allegheny
Rod Groomes, MD, Armstrong 
Bernie Smith, Indiana
Sandra Smythe, Westmoreland
Walt Vincinelly, Fayette 
Thomas White, Lawrence

•Linda Zidek, RN, Washington 
Directors at-Large 
Joseph Akif
Kay Jo Fischer
Richard G. Fuller, MEd, EMT-P

•
Douglas Garretson, NREMT-P 

•
William E. Groft, EMT-P 

•
Ed HeltmanBrian Kircher Harry Meredith Bradley D. Penrod, AAE 

•
B.J. PinoRodney Rohrer 

•
Ron Roth, MDPatrick M. Sherin Edward Stevenson Don Swayze Jim Withee 


•Indicates Executive Committee
EMSI Staff E-Mail Addresses 
Gloria Arrington, Accountant 
garrington@emsi04.org 
Jessika Brown, Secretary 
jbrown@emsi04.org 
Scott Crawford, Regional Training Coordinator 
scrawford@emsi04.org 
Pam Dixon, Data Processor 
pdixon@emsi04.org 
Kurt Henkel, Regional Training Coordinator 
khenkel@emsi04.org 
Linda Kovac, Con-Ed/Training Program Specialist 
lkovac@emsi04.org 
Kevin A. Lipscomb, Assistant Executive Director 
klipscomb@emsi04.org 
Louise Myers, Data Processor 
lmyers@emsi04.org 
Joe Ponko, Medical Specialist 
jponko@emsi04.org 
Bruce Sivak, Prehospital Service Specialist 
bsivak@emsi04.org 
Philip Stoner, Executive Director 
pstoner@emsi04.org 
Nancy Theilacker, Secretary 
ntheilacker@emsi04.org 

www .emsi04.org 

EMSI Intercom is published quarterly as a service of Emergency Medical Service Institute. EMSI is a regional non-profit agency coordinating emergency medical resources in ten counties of southwestern Pennsylvania. 
Philip Stoner ...........................................Executive Director
Camille Downing.......................................................Editor
Drawing Conclusions .............................................Designer
Reed & Witting ........................................................Printer



From the days of “scoop ’n swoop” to modern day Nurses Bring
sophisticated patient care by highly trained personnel — Care and
EMS has come a long way. This special edition of EMSI Knowledge
Intercom pays tribute to some of the key people who
were a part of the illustrious history and growth of EMS to EMS
in southwestern Pennsylvania. 16


221 Penn Avenue
Suite 2500
Pittsburgh, PA 15221

(412) 242-7322 



