<title>EMSAMS PowerPoint presentation</title>


Goals of this presentation

Explain the system design

Provide an overview of the criticality of 
participation and “buy in”
Identify reasonable expectations of the 

application
Describe the testing process & schedule






New Course Application

Applicant submits via web & sends to 

region Region reviews/recommends & sends to EMS Office 
EMS Office approves/disapproves
If approved, EMS Office assigns #
Course added to master list & web






Class Registrations

Applicant chooses to register a class

CE Web Application looks to see if they are a valid CE Sponsor or Training Inst. If yes, they may continue registering 
the class, sending it to the region Region reviews/approves/disapproves If approved, region assigns # Sent to web 



Sponsor/Training Institute List


Will contain a primary contact who can manage/update the people authorized to submit class registrations for the CE Sponsor or Training Institute once they have a user profile on the system. 

Will contain the list of people authorized to submit class registrations for CE and/or certification classes 
May be able to provide information to update the master database. 



CE Credit View

Allows a practitioner to view his/her 

own CE earned/recorded in the system The practitioner must create a user profile to access the system 



System Testing Process

System testing began on June 4th and 
continued until June 13th. Approximately 35 people from 5 regional EMS councils participated in the system testing phase. 
System tests went very well, identified a multitude of issues that have been addressed and corrected as well as many things that worked well from the beginning. 



Implementation

Implementation is scheduled to begin the last week in June and continue to the mid-July, 2003. 




st week – 5 regions that did testing nd week – 4 additional regions rd week – 4 additional regions th week – 3 final regions 



What is Needed?

It is essential that CE sponsors and training institutes manage their users and oversee class registrations Good data in, to get good data out 

The more complete the data is when it is entered, the easier it is to find when searching 




Data Entry

No abbreviations

Spell-out ALL acronyms (put acronyms in 
parenthesis)
Correct spelling (can’t find words that are 

not spelled correctly)
Consistency in organization names, course 
titles, etc. 




Have a Good Experience!

Questions should be directed to the 

regional EMS council System issues should be emailed to ems_ceweb@state.pa.us 

