<title>Exam Manager Briefing to Written Examination Candidates</title>
EXAM MANAGER BRIEFING TO
WRITTEN EXAMINATION CANDIDATES

Introduce yourself and the regional EMS council you represent. 
READ THE FOLLOWING: 
1. 
Place all papers, books, notes, purses, etc., on the floor. 	There must be no material on your desk or visible to any candidate. 

2. 
Turn off all monitors, pagers, scanners and cell phones. 

3. 
As I call your name, please come forward and bring your photo identification. You will be provided an exam booklet and an answer sheet.  

4. 
DO NOT OPEN THE BOOKLET UNTIL TOLD TO DO SO.  	IF YOU DO, YOU WILL BE DISMISSED FROM THE EXAMINATION. 

5. 
Call names (place booklet number on roster next to the candidates name). 


If there are any name or address cha nges to be made since the start of the class, please notify me now.  If necessary have the candidate complete a new student application for with the current information.  
6. 
Refer to the student application form instructions (Appendix E) and exam answer form instructions (Appendix J.) 

7. 
This examination contains 100 multiple-choice questions. 

8. 
Choose the one best answer for each question. 


. 9. Completely darken the dots indicating your answer completely.  If you erase, erase completely. Any answer with more than one choice selected will result in an incorrect answer. 
10. 
You will be given two (2) hours to take the exam. 

11. 
The minimum overall passing score is 70%. 	If you receive less than a 70% you will be given the opportunity to retake a written exam.  

12. 
Exam results will be mailed to you at the address on your student application form.  The scoring may take up to three weeks.  Do not call during this time.  The tests may not have been scored and results cannot be given over the phone. 

13. 
Upon completion of the examination, you must return all materials that were given to you. If all exam booklets are not accounted for at the end of the exam, none of the answer sheets will be scored. 

14. 
Do not write in the exam booklet. 	You will be charged $10.00 for any written marks in the booklet. If you see marks in the booklet, raise your hand and when recognized by me, quietly move to the front of the room with your exam booklet and show the marks to me. 

15. 
I am not permitted to answer any exam related questions. 


INTERIM POLICY APPENDIX P	1 of 2 
4/30/2003 
EXAM MANAGER BRIEFING TO
WRITTEN EXAMINATION CANDIDATES

16. 
If you are caught cheating, your exam will be taken from you and you will automatically fail.  You will be required to retake the entire training program before you take the exam again. 

17. 
If you need to use the restroom, bring your exam booklet and answer sheet to me. You will not be allowed additional time to complete the exam due to restroom break. 

18. 
Now, open 	 your exam booklet and read only the first two pages.  DO NOT turn to the third page. 

19. 
When you have finished your examination, bring the exam booklet and answer sheet to me. Do not come forward if another candidate is already turning in his/her booklet. 

20. 
Do you have any questions?  	You have two hours. The time for the examination to be completed is: (insert time) [write the time on a chalk board, if available}. 

21. 
You can begin and Good Luck! 


INTERIM POLICY APPENDIX P	2 of 2 
4/30/2003 

