<title>EMSI - Charter</title>
CHARTER of the EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE INSTITUTE 
In compliance with the requirements of the Non-profit Corporation Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved May 5, 1933, P.L. 289, as amended, the undersigned, all of whom are residents of Pennsylvania, and citizens of the United States, its territories or possessions, and all of whom are of full age, having associated themselves together for the purpose or purposes hereinafter specified, and desiring that they may be incorporated, and that a charter may be issued to them and their associates and successors according to the law, do hereby certify: 
FIRST. The name of the corporation is Emergency Medical Service Institute1. 
SECOND. The initial registered office of the proposed corporation in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, will be located at Room 610, 200 Ross Street, Pittsburgh, County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania. 
THIRD2. The Corporation does not contemplate pecuniary gain or profit, incidental or otherwise to its members. The purposes for which it is formed are: To improve the quality and delivery of emergency medical and health services by 
(a) 
determining community emergency medical and health service needs; 

(b) 
providing and encouraging plans, programs and assistance directed to improving emergency medical and health services; 

(c) 
expediting the implementation of measures needed to insure optimal emergency medical and health services; 

(d) 
providing effective coordination of the efforts of appropriate community organizations and agencies interested in emergency medical and health services; and 

(e) 
encouraging participation in and the coordination of activities of community organizations and agencies in state and national plans and programs devoted to emergency medical and health services. 


Notwithstanding any other provision of these articles, the corporation shall not conduct or carry on any activities not permitted to be conducted or carried on by an organization exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and its Regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, or by an organization contributions to which are deductible under Section 170(c)(2) of such Code and Regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. 
Upon the dissolution of the corporation or the winding up of its affairs, the assets of the corporation shall be distributed exclusively to charitable, religious, scientific, literary, or educational organizations which would then qualify under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and its Regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. 
FOURTH. The corporation shall exist perpetually. FIFTH. The name, place of residence and post office address of each of the incorporators are as follows: Fred Brady, M.D.
(addresses redacted...) 
Jack A. Engelmohr Waldo L. Treuting, M.D. 
C. William Weisser, M.D. Jesse S. Leighton 
SIXTH. The names and addresses of those persons who are to act as directors and who shall be subject to all of the provisions of the aforesaid Act relating to directors, and who shall constitute the number of directors of the corporation until changed by the by-laws, are: All directors shall serve a term of one year and until their successors are duly elected pursuant to the by-laws of this corporation. 
Name and Address  Representing  
Commissioner, William R. Hunt(addresses reacted...)  Allegheny County Commissioners  
Ralph J. Stalter, M.D.  Allegheny County Coroners Office  
James Coyne  Allegheny County Firefighters Local1036  
Carl First  Allegheny County Volunteer Fireman’sAssociation  
Waldo L. Treuting M.D.  Allegheny County Health Department  
Gerard P. Hamill, M.D.  Allegheny County Institution District  
Fred C. Brady, M.D.  Allegheny County Medical Society  
David M. Janavitz  Allegheny County Mental Health andMental Retardation Board  
Otto P. Platz  Allegheny Fraternal Order of Police,Lodge #91  
Clifford V. Colwill  American Red Cross, Pittsburgh Chapter  
C. William Weisser  Health and Welfare Association of  
Allegheny County  
Jack H. Engelmohr  Hospital Council of WesternPennsylvania  
Steven Sieverts  Hospital Planning Association ofAllegheny County  
Paul M. Lewis, M.D.  Hospital Utilization Project  
Ernest W. Libman  Mayor’s Committee on Human Resources,Inc.  
Gertrude Levin (Mrs.)  Office of Civil Defense for Pittsburghand Allegheny County  

David W. Craig  Office of the Mayor  
Gerald Esposito  Pennsylvania Ambulance Association  
Henry L. Albert  Pennsylvania Health Department  
James Repella  Pennsylvania Nurses Association  
Jesse S. Leighton  United States Public Health Service  
Robert R. Carpenter, M.D.  Western Pennsylvania Regional MedicalProgram  

SEVENTH. The corporation is to be organized on a non-stock basis. 
EIGHTH. No liquor shall be sold by the corporation or on its premises and a breach of this provision shall be a cause of forfeiture of the charter which shall be surrendered if such breach shall be alleged and proved to the satisfaction of the court. 
NINTH: The authorized number and qualifications of members of the corporation, the different classes of membership, (if any), the property, voting and other rights and privileges of members and each class of membership (if classified), and the liability for dues or assessments and the methods of collection thereof, shall be as set forth in the by-laws of the corporation, as adopted by the Board of Directors, as well as such other provisions as shall be deemed necessary for the administration and regulation of the corporation. 
WITNESS our hands and seals this 4th day of November, 1968. /s/ W. L. Treuting (SEAL) /s/ Fred Brad (SEAL)W. L. Treuting Fred Brady 
/s/ C. Wm. Weisser (SEAL) /s/ Jack H. Engelmohr 	(SEAL)
C. Wm. Weisser Jack A. Engelmohr (sic) 
/s/ Jesse S. Leighton (SEAL)Jesse S. Leighton 
Publisher's notes 
1.	
On 13 August 1974, the corporation changed its name from the original "Allegheny County Council on Emergency Medical and Health Services". 

2.	
On 9 November 1984, the membership effectively resolved to amend the Third article to allow the corporation to provide services outside of Allegheny County, and to delete an original paragraph (f). 



