<title>Medical Command Physician Application Form</title>
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH  
DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
APPLICATION FOR RECOGNITION AS A MEDICAL  
COMMAND PHYSICIAN  
PLEASE PRINT  
Name  M.D.  D.O.  
Last  First  Mi  (CIRCLE ONE)  
Home Address  
City  State  PA  Zip Code  
Medical Command Facility  
Address  
City  State  PA  Zip Code  
Current Hospital Staff Affiliation(s)  Specialty Area  

Circle Answer Circle Answer 
1  Are you licensed by the Pennsylvania  c.  If you do not complete the AMA’s Continuing  
Department of State, Bureau of Professional  Medical Education credits or its equivalent,  
And Occupational Affairs ……………………  Yes  No  are you a post graduate year Iiin an  
approved residency program in emergency  
If yes: License Type  medicine who will have concurrent on-line  
License Number  supervision by an approved medical  
Expiration Date  command physician?…………………….  Yes  No  
2  a.  Are you board-certified in emergency 4.  Are you presently in another type of residency  
medicine?………………………………  Yes  No Program?…………………………………………  Yes  No  
If yes, please provide certification date  
If yes: Year 
b.  If you are not board-certified in emergency  
Medicine, are you currently certified by the  Specialty 
American Heart Association in advanced  
Cardiac life support?……………………  Yes  No  Certification Date  
If yes: Provider or Instructor?  5. a. Are you a full-time emergency physician?…  Yes  No  
Expiration Date:  
(  ) Full Time from  to  
c.  If you are not board-certified in Emergency  (  ) Part Time from  to  
Medicine, are you currently certified by the  Average # of hours/year  
American College of Surgeons in Advanced  
Trauma Life Support?…………………….  Yes  No  b.  If you are not a full-time emergency  
physician, do you practice for at least half- 
If yes, provider or instructor?  time of a full-time medical practice?…     Yes  No  
Provider expiration date.  
c.  Please describe your full-time practice  
3.  a.  Do you complete the American Medical  
Association’s (AMA) Continuing Medical  
Education Credits or its equivalent (150  
credit hours every three years?)………  Yes  No  
b.  If you do not complete the AMA’s Continuing  
Medical Education credits or its equivalent,  
are you a post graduate year III in an  5.  Do you possess a valid Drug Enforcement  
approved residency program in emergency  Agency Number?……………………………  Yes  No  
medicine?…………………………………  Yes  No  
If yes, provide number.  
If yes, which emergency medicine residency program?  


If no, provide explanation 	Identify name of program director who has given approval. 
Signature of Program Director: 
c. Identify name and location of hospitals where you will be If you are a resident, and you utilize your hospital DEA providing medical command. Number to order controlled substances, identify the hospital DEA number, as well as the suffix assigned to you 
7. a.Have you successfully completed a base station medical command course within the last two years?…………………… Yes No d. As a resident, if you provide medical command at several 
b.	If not, are you willing to complete a base
station medical command course adopted
by the Department?…………………

hospitals, explain how these hospitals are affiliated with the hospital to which you have been assigned, and issued an Yes No interim limited license practice. 
8.	Are you currently an approved medical command physician in another area of the region?…………………………………. Yes No Where? 
9.a.	If you are a resident (in an emergency residency program), who has a graduate 10. As a medical command physician, when you order a Schedule II training license, do you agree to only controlled substance and it has been administered, you must provide medical command within the comply within 72 hours with the requirement to forward a signed complex of the hospital to which you are prescription to the dispensing/replacing pharmacy, hospital or assigned?…………………………… Yes No physician. Please sign below that you are aware of this 
requirement. 
b.	If you are a resident (in an emergency
Residency program), who has a graduate Signature: 
Interim limited license, do you agree to
Only provide medical command within the Please attach copies of:
Complex of the hospitals for which your 1. Pennsylvania Physician’s License
Program director has issued written 2. Current Curriculum Vitae
Approval?………………………………… Yes No 3. Board Certification or Current ACLS and Current ATLS 

Certifications 
4. 
Completion of AMA’s Continuing Medical Education Credits 

5. 
Base Station Medical Command Course Certificate 


Section 4904 of the Crimes Code Provides that: 
(a)	A person commits a misdemeanor of the second degree if, with intent to mislead a public servant in performing his official function, he: 
(1)	
makes any written false statement which he does not believe to be true: 

(2)	
submits or invites reliance on any writing which he knows to be true; forges, or otherwise lacking in authenticity; or 

(3)	
submits or invites reliance on any sample, specimen, map, boundary mark, or other project which he knows to be false. 


“I hereby certify that the information provided in this application is true and correct to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief. I further acknowledge that I am on notice of the fact that this information will be relied upon by a public official to perform their duties authorized by law. I further acknowledge that I am aware of the fact that false statements which are made herein are punishable under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.” 
I understand that if my application is approved that recognition as a medical command physician will be for a period two years. 
Applying Physician’s Signature  Date  
Approved:  (sign)  
Medicial Command Facility Medical Director  (Print)  Date  
Approved:  (sign)  
Regional Medical Director  (Print)  Date  
Approved:  (sign)  

Reginal EMS Council Executive Director	 (Print) Date 
After you have the Medical Command Facility Medical Director sign your application, please forward the application to the regional emergency medical services council 
ATTENTION APPLICANT: 
When approved/disapproved, the regional emergency medical services council will forward a copy of the application to the following: 
1.	
Applicant (Medical Command Physician) 

2.	
Medical Command Facility 

3.	
Pennsylvania Department of Health, Division of Emergency Medical Services. 



